Elbow Disorders
Effective July 14, 2025

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Summary of Recommendations .............................................................................................. 2
Workflows ............................................................................................................................... 2
Introduction ............................................................................................................................ 2
Ergonomic Interventions ....................................................................................................... 18
Return-to-Work Programs .................................................................................................... 19
Biceps and Triceps Tendinosis ............................................................................................... 19
Biceps and Triceps Strains and Tears .................................................................................... 28
Elbow Contusion ................................................................................................................... 30
Elbow Dislocation .................................................................................................................. 34
Elbow Fracture ...................................................................................................................... 43
Elbow Osteoarthrosis ............................................................................................................ 51
Elbow Osteonecrosis ............................................................................................................. 56
Elbow Pain ............................................................................................................................ 60
Elbow Sprain ......................................................................................................................... 69
Lateral and Medial Epicondylalgia......................................................................................... 75
Olecranon Bursitis ............................................................................................................... 131
Pronator Syndrome ............................................................................................................. 139
Radial Nerve Entrapment .................................................................................................... 147
Ulnar Nerve Entrapment ..................................................................................................... 156
Contributors ........................................................................................................................ 189
References .......................................................................................................................... 195
Appendix 1 .......................................................................................................................... 218

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

1

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The Evidence-based Practice Elbow Disorders Panel’s recommendations are based on
critically appraised higher-quality research evidence and on expert consensus observing
First Principles when higher quality evidence was unavailable or inconsistent
(see Methodology). The reader is cautioned to utilize the more detailed indications, specific
appropriate diagnoses, temporal sequencing, preceding testing or conservative treatment,
and contraindications that are elaborated in more detail for each test or treatment in the
body of this guideline in using these recommendations in clinical practice or medical
management. These recommendations are not simple “yes/no” criteria.
All ACOEM guidelines include analyses of numerous interventions, whether or not FDAapproved. For non-FDA-approved interventions, recommendations are based on the
available evidence; however, this is not an endorsement of their use. In addition, many of
the medications recommended are utilized off-label. (For example, anti-epileptic agents
have been used off-label since the 1960s to treat chronic pain.)
Recommendations are made under the following categories:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Strongly Recommended, “A” Level
Moderately Recommended, “B” Level
Recommended, “C” Level
Insufficient-Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient-No Recommendation (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient-Not Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Not Recommended, “C” Level
Moderately Not Recommended, “B” Level
Strongly Not Recommended, “A” Level

WORKFLOWS
●
Master Algorithm. ACOEM Guidelines for Care of Acute and Subacute Elbow
Disorders
●
Algorithm 1. Initial Evaluation of Elbow Disorders
●
Algorithm 2. Initial and Follow-up Management of Elbow Disorders
●
Algorithm 3. Evaluation of Slow-to-Recover Patients with Elbow Disorders
(Symptoms >4 Weeks)
●
Algorithm 4. Surgical Considerations for Patients with Anatomic and Physiologic
Evidence of Nerve Compression Coupled with Persistent Elbow Symptoms
●
Algorithm 5. Further Management of Elbow Disorders

INTRODUCTION
The following elbow disorders are discussed in this guideline: biceps tendinosis, biceps
strains and tears, elbow contusion, elbow dislocation, elbow fracture, elbow osteoarthrosis,
elbow osteonecrosis, elbow pain, elbow sprain, lateral epicondylalgia, medial
epicondylalgia, olecranon bursitis, pronator syndrome, radial nerve entrapment, and ulnar
neuropathy at the elbow.
Other prominent disorders, which include cervical radiculopathy and cervical and upper
thoracic spinal stenosis (see Cervical and Thoracic Spinal Disorders guideline for extensive
discussions), are not reviewed in this guideline in detail, but should be considered in the
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

2

differential diagnosis of elbow pain and symptoms. Additional diagnostic considerations
include hand and forearm disorders (see the Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders and
Chronic Pain guidelines); atherosclerotic abnormalities such as aneurysms, avulsion
fractures, mononeuritis, benign tumors or cancer, crystal arthropathies (e.g., gout,
pseudogout, hydroxyapatite); infections including septic arthritis, Lyme disease, reactive
arthritis (formerly Reiters) or hepatitis B and C; and inflammatory or “collagen vascular”
disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, ankylosing
spondylitis, dermatomyositis, and polymyalgia rheumatica.

BASIC PRINCIPLES AND DEFINITIONS
Acute, Subacute and Chronic Pain: For purposes of identifying interventions at different
stages of diseases, acute pain is defined as pain for up to a 1 month duration, subacute pain
is from 1 to 3 months duration, and chronic pain is over 3 months duration (see Chronic Pain
guideline for additional information).
Active Therapy: The term “active therapy” is commonly used to describe treatment that
requires the patient to assume an active role in rehabilitative treatment. Although there is
no one specific treatment defined by this term, it most commonly includes therapeutic
exercises, particularly aerobic activities and muscle reconditioning (weight lifting or
resistance training) (1), activities of daily living, community reintegration, and cognitive
therapy. Some authors include active stretching and treatment with psychological, social
and/or educational components requiring active participation from the patient (2).
Active Exercise Therapy: Active exercise therapy typically consists of cardiovascular training
and muscle strengthening (3,4), although it may also include progressive or occasionally even
active stretching, especially in patients with substantially reduced ranges of motion. Active
exercise therapy is used as a primary treatment for chronic pain, is frequently initiated in
the course of treating subacute pain, and is a primary treatment after various surgeries. The
goal of active exercise therapy is to improve function (3). The word “active” is used to
differentiate individualized exercise programs designed to address and rehabilitate specific
functional, anatomic, or physiologic deficits from passive treatment modalities or from
forms of exercise that require very little effort or investment on the part of the patient or
clinician.
Allied Health Therapies: There are a number of treatment approaches that require
extensive training and development of specific skills. The treatment approaches in this
category include manipulation, mobilization, massage, and acupuncture.
Bursae: Fluid-filled sacs within the body which provide lubrication in areas, such as points
where muscles move over bony projections.
Bursitis: Bursitis occurs when the bursae become inflamed and irritated. This results in pain
when the overlying muscle is used. It may occur from a number of exposures, including
when there is trauma, bumping the elbow, direct pressure, or with forceful and
unaccustomed use usually involving leaning on the elbow.
Delayed Recovery: This is most commonly defined as an increase in the period of time prior
to returning to work or to usual activities, when compared with the length of time expected,
based on reasonable expectations, disorder severity, age, and treatments provided.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

3

Elbow Dislocation: Elbow dislocations are relatively uncommon and they usually result from
a violent or high-speed collision or from falls. Pain is usually severe, associated with an
inability to use the arm. Most other dislocations in adults occur due to either a congenital
malformation of the elbow joint or recurrent dislocations associated with ligamentous
laxity.
Elbow Joint: The elbow joint is a synovial hinge type joint based on the articulation of the
ulna and the trochlea of the humerus. Ligaments support the joint. Absent ligamentous
laxity or prior dislocations, dislocation of the elbow joint is difficult in adults due to the lack
of joint laxity and typically requires considerable force. By contrast, dislocation of the radial
head in young children is common and requires considerably less force.
Elbow Pain: Pain originating from the elbow is usually felt in the center of the joint and
generally does not radiate. Pain in the elbow may also be due to referred pain from
cardiovascular or metastatic processes, cervical or upper thoracic disc herniation with
neurological impingement, and chest disorders including arteriosclerotic disorders.
Enthesitis: “Irritation” of the muscular or tendinous attachment to bone, usually related to
high force use, particularly if unaccustomed. Signs of traditional inflammation are not
present, thus the suffix produces a misnomer despite widespread use.
Enthesopathy: Disorder of the muscular or tendinous attachment to bone.
Epicondylitis: Pain at the lateral or medial epicondyle of the elbow (humerus) from any
cause. Traditional signs of inflammation are absent. The more accurate term for this
condition is epicondylalgia, as classic inflammation is absent and histopathological findings
of degenerative changes are common (5,6,7,8,9).
Epicondylalgia: Pain in the epicondyle from any cause (it can be located at the origin of a
tendon or be referred).
Functional Capacity Evaluation (FCE): A comprehensive battery of performance-based tests
used to attempt to assess an individual’s ability for work and activities of daily living (10). An
FCE may be done to identify a person’s ability to perform specific job tasks associated with a
job (job-specific FCE) or their ability to perform physical activities associated with any job
(general FCE). See also the Chronic Pain and Low Back Disorders guidelines).
Functional Improvement (especially Objective Evidence): Entails tracking and recording
evidence that the patient is making progress towards increasing their functional state.
Validated tools are preferable.
Functional Restoration: A term initially used for a variant of interdisciplinary pain alleviation
or at least amelioration characterized by objective physical function measures, intensive
graded exercise and multi-modal pain/disability management with both psychological and
case management features (11-17). The term has become popular as a philosophy and an
approach to medical care and rehabilitation. In that sense, the term refers to a blend of
various techniques (physical and psychosocial) for evaluating and treating the chronic nonmalignant pain patient, particularly in the workers’ compensation setting (see Chronic Pain
guidelines).
Inflammation: A localized protective response elicited by an injury or destruction of tissues,
which serves to destroy, dilute, or wall off (sequester) both the injurious agent and the
injured tissue. Inflammation is characterized in the acute form by four classical signs: 1) pain
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

4

(dolor); 2) heat (calor); 3) redness (rubor); and 4) swelling (tumor). Loss of function (functio
laesa) may also occur. Histologically, inflammation involves a complex series of events,
including dilatation of arterioles, capillaries, and venules, with increased permeability and
blood flow; exudation of fluids, including plasma proteins; and leukocytic migration into the
inflammatory focus. Classic inflammatory responses are found in infectious diseases. Most
elbow disorders exhibit only one classic sign of inflammation (18) – that of pain; therefore,
these disorders do not qualify as an acute inflammatory process in which three of the four
classical signs must be present.
Olecranon Bursa: The olecranon bursa lies between the olecranon process and overlying
dermis.
Olecranon Bursitis: Olecranon bursitis occurs when the trochanteric bursa is “inflamed,”
although in most cases, there are not classic symptoms and signs of inflammation. Classic
inflammation may occur in the olecranon bursa with arthropathies or infectious agents.
Patients usually complain of swelling over the point of the elbow (olecranon process). Pain
may or may not be present, and if marked, suggests an inflammatory condition such as
infection or crystal arthropathy. The elbow joint itself is not involved. The condition is
thought to occur either as a result of an acute trauma such as a fall, bump or blow, or
leaning on the elbow.
Osteonecrosis [Avascular Necrosis (AVN)]: Osteonecrosis occurs when the tenuous blood
supply to the bone is interrupted. Osteonecrosis can be a result of traumatic or
nontraumatic factors and most commonly occurs in the femoral and humeral heads.
Barotrauma (i.e., rapid decompression) is the most common known occupational factor. The
condition is painless in its early stages, but when it advances, patients generally present
with pain and limitation of motion. Pain is usually exacerbated by use and relieved with rest.
Pain Behavior: Verbal and non-verbal actions (e.g., grimacing, groaning, limping, using pain
relieving or support devices, requesting pain medications, etc.) which communicate the
concept of pain to others.
Passive Modality: Various types of clinician-given treatments in which the patient is passive.
These treatments include medication, injection, surgery, allied health therapies (e.g.,
massage, acupuncture, manipulation), and various physical modalities such as hydrotherapy
(e.g., whirlpools, hot tubs, spas), ultrasound, TENS, other electrical therapies, and heat and
cryotherapies.
Primary Prevention: Primary prevention involves preventing the condition or risk factor
from developing (e.g., physical activity programs to prevent obesity which results in
osteoarthrosis.
Rehabilitation: Rehabilitation is used in these Guidelines to mean physical medicine,
therapeutic and rehabilitative evaluations, and procedures. Rehabilitation services are
delivered under the direction of trained and licensed individuals such as physicians,
occupational therapists, and physical therapists. Sometimes mental health professionals are
incorporated in the treatment team, particularly for select chronic pain patients.
Jurisdictions may differ on qualifications for licensure to perform rehabilitative evaluations
and interventions.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

5

Secondary Prevention: Secondary prevention involves reduction in exposure or risk factor
after the risk factor has already developed, but before the disease has occurred (e.g., use of
fall protection equipment to prevent fractures).
Sprain: Disruption of a joint’s ligaments. The mechanism involves an acute, high-force
deviation of the joint beyond the normal range of motion.
Strain: Disruption of a myotendinous junction, usually from a high force, unaccustomed
exertion(s). It may also occur during an accident. This term is occasionally used to describe
non-specific muscle pain in the absence of knowledge of an anatomic pathophysiological
correlate.
Synovitis: Synovitis refers to inflammation of a synovial membrane, although in most cases,
there are not classic symptoms and signs of inflammation. Classic inflammation occurs
however with crystalline arthropathies or infectious agents. Synovitis is usually painful,
especially with motion. Fluctuating swelling may occur due to effusion within the synovial
sac.
Synovial Membrane: The synovial membrane incorporates the entire femoral head, the
anterior neck, and the proximal half of the posterior neck of the femur.
Tendinitis: This term has been used to denote a tendon abnormality usually accompanied
by pain and tenderness over the tendon or tendon origin/insertion on examination.
Infrequently, there may be warmth or swelling. However, tendinitis implies “inflammation,”
and there is scientific agreement that classic signs of inflammation are absent in nearly all
cases. More commonly, there may be signs of mild inflammation. Therefore, the term
“tendinitis” is often replaced by the more accurate term “tendinosis. ” There is also some
suboptimal use of the term “tendinitis” among some practitioners to label nonspecific pain
with tendinitis.
Tendinosis: A tendon disorder that most commonly consists of an underlying, chronic
degenerative tendon condition. When symptomatic, there usually is pain and tenderness
over the tendon. Some warmth may be present, but redness is usually absent. It may be
associated with limited movement (9,19). Tendinosis is believed to usually occur due to an
interaction of individual and physical factors, which may include vocational and avocational
activities. Tendinoses are the most common types of musculoskeletal disorders, likely
outpacing arthroses. The severity of these disorders is thought to be influenced by
numerous factors including:
●
The person’s age, presence of various medical conditions and habits, level of fitness,
and general health (chronic tendon degeneration is more common with age) (20). Poor
fitness is theorized to make physical injuries more common.
●
The amount of forceful use and lack of recovery time (e.g., hours of work per day,
per week, and per month as well as number of breaks per day) (21,22,23).
●
The person’s genetics (e.g., a higher initial Type III/Type I collagen ratio in the
tendons).
●
Potential ergonomic risk factors associated with musculoskeletal disorders (i.e.,
excessive force, repetition, sustained exertion, vibration, improperly fitted tools or sports
equipment, or poor technique) (21,22,23).
Tendinosis is also associated with cardiovascular disease risk factors in the shoulder’s
rotator cuff, thus as extensive array of additional individual risk factors, though as yet
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

6

largely undefined, may also be operant for this condition at the elbow (see Shoulder
Disorders guideline).
Tenosynovitis: Tenosynovitis is most commonly used to refer to pain generated from the
sheath and structures surrounding a tendon. The term technically refers to inflammation of
a tendon sheath although in most cases there are not classic symptoms and signs of
inflammation. Classic inflammation may occur with inflammatory arthropathies, such as
rheumatoid arthritis, or with infections. The term should be avoided for elbow disorders as
tendon sheaths are absent in this body region.
Tertiary Prevention: Tertiary prevention has most typically been defined as amelioration of
the condition after it has already developed. For example, after a patient has osteonecrosis,
precluding them from diving or other decompression activities is a method of tertiary
prevention.
Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC): Most
common outcome measure other than standard pain ratings and Visual Analog Scale (VAS)
pain ratings. It combines subjective ratings of pain with activities, stiffness, physical
function, social function and emotional function measures (24).

IMPACT
Upper-extremity musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) continue to account for a significant
number of work-related illnesses and disabilities in the United States. According to the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, non-traumatic MSDs make up 65% of all occupational illnesses in
the United States (25). Work-related elbow disorders are among the most common causes of
reported occupational injuries and workers’ compensation claims. These disorders are
broadly and most accurately classified as MSDs (21). In 2008, MSDs accounted for 29% of all
workplace injuries requiring time away from work, compared to 30% of total days-awayfrom-work cases in 2006 (26). There were a total of 335,390 MSDs in 2007 requiring a median
of 9 days away from work, two more days than the median for all days-away-from-work
cases. This is a decline of 21,770 cases (6 percent) from 2006, and an 11 percent decline
from 2005 (26).
Upper extremity MSDs, including elbow disorders, now account for at least 4% of all state
workers’ compensation claims, an increase from 1% seen a decade ago (27,28,29). Of these, the
State of Washington has reported that elbow disorders accounted for the third highest
incidence rate with 29. 7 injuries per 10,000 full-time employees (30).

WORK-RELATEDNESS
A determination of work-relatedness requires a careful history regarding occupational
physical factors, non-work activities, individual or personal factors, and psychosocial,
psychiatric, and other risk factors, as well as a thoughtful careful assessment of the relative
contribution each makes to the patient’s problem while incorporating epidemiological
evidence (see the Work-Relatedness guideline). However, many conditions have no
apparent cause and thus are defined as idiopathic.
Acute occupational elbow injuries related to a specific acute traumatic event are noncontroversial, the location of that event determines work-relatedness. Most jurisdictions
also request an opinion from physicians as to whether a disease or disorder should be
considered work related for the purpose of a workers’ compensation claim. Physicians need
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

7

to remember that their role is to supply opinion and that the medical/scientific answer and
the legal answer as determined by regulations and case law precedents in a particular
jurisdiction (workers’ compensation system) are different (see the Work-Relatedness
guideline). With some noteworthy exceptions, there are few if any quality epidemiological
studies supporting work relatedness for many elbow disorders. Thus, aside from these
specific circumstances (e.g., occupational fractures and other acute trauma, biceps ruptures
from a maximal lift, osteonecrosis from barotraumas, lateral epicondylitis when performing
stereotypical high-force work, olecranon bursitis after a fall on the elbow), most opinions
are speculative.
Some elbow symptoms are occupational in origin, differing by industry, job task, or disorder
in question. By analogy to the hand and wrist, decisions about which jobs to analyze, and
their prioritization, are thought to be of increasing importance as the proportion of affected
individuals has been identified as in excess of 50% of the workforce per annum in settings of
combinations of high force and high stereotypical occupational activity. In general,
prioritization of job analyses in workplace settings is based on the numbers of affected
individuals, reported and perceived rates of MSDs, costs and severity of the disorders, and
planned job redesigns. From an occupational health care perspective, ergonomic analysis of
a job may also be indicated for failure to improve in the absence of other plausible
explanations. The employer’s role in accommodating activity limitations and preventing
further problems through ergonomic changes may be a key factor in hastening the
employee’s return to full activity, particularly among workers with a history of high job
physical factors. In some cases, it may be desirable to conduct an ergonomic analysis of the
activities that may be contributing to the symptoms.

INITIAL ASSESSMENT
The physician performing an initial evaluation of a patient with elbow pain or other
symptoms should seek a discrete explanatory diagnosis (see General Approach to Initial
Assessment and Documentation guideline). A careful, thorough history is required (31,32).
Review of systems that also involves the hand, shoulder, spine, and chest is necessary. The
examination of the patient with elbow symptoms generally needs to focus on the elbow
joint and include relevant neighboring structures similar to the review of systems. Findings
of the medical history and physical examination can alert the physician to other pathology
that presents with pain or other constitutional symptoms. Certain findings, referred to as
red flags, raise suspicion of serious underlying medical conditions (see Table 1). Potentially
serious disorders include infections, tumors, and systemic rheumatological disorders. The
absence of red flags generally rules out the need for special studies, referral, or inpatient
care for many patients during the first 4 weeks when spontaneous improvement or recovery
is expected.
Elbow disorders may be classified into one of four working categories (note, these
categories are somewhat arbitrary with significant overlap between the groups):
●
Potentially serious elbow disorders: Fracture, acute dislocation, infection, or
neurovascular compromise. These disorders are usually associated with trauma.
●
Mechanical disorders: Derangements of the elbow that are related to acute trauma,
such as ligament sprain or tears, contusions, or bursitis. Many musculoskeletal disorders are
often categorized as mechanical disorders, although there is evidence that these disorders
may be associated with degenerative changes.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

8

●
Degenerative disorders: Consequences of aging, medical conditions, or forceful, or
prolonged physical exertion, or a combination thereof. This category includes tendinosis.
●
Non-specific disorders: Self-limiting disorders in the absence of objective
physiological findings. Non-specific disorders do not suggest necessarily internal
derangement or referred pain.
Evaluation and Diagnostic Issues
●
The elbow joint should be carefully evaluated with a history, physical examination,
and focused diagnostic testing. A complete physical examination is recommended, since
pain can be referred from the neck, shoulder, or chest.
●
The initial elbow examination or consultation of patients with acute, subacute or
chronic elbow symptoms should focus on detecting both remedial conditions and any red
flags for alternate conditions. The presence of red flags generally requires either urgent
testing and treatment or referral for appropriate care.
●
In the absence of red flags, the clinician should prescribe efficacious treatments,
monitoring patients for complications, facilitating the healing process, and returning the
individual to modified alternative or full-duty work.
●
Initial evaluation of elbow joint pain only requires elbow x-rays in some cases
depending on history and presentation. X-rays of the neck and shoulder may also be
indicated in certain circumstances.
●
Diagnostic ultrasound is seldom necessary. However, it may be helpful in select cases
involving biceps tendinosis, severe strains, or refractory epicondylalgia.
●
Magnetic resonance imaging is particularly helpful for diagnosing osteonecrosis,
biceps tendinosis, and biceps tears.
●
CT scanning may be helpful in evaluating the patient with a traumatic elbow
dislocation or arthroplasty-associated recurrent dislocation.

HISTORY
The medical history is usually the most important aspect in the evaluation of a patient.
Many disorders of the elbow will be diagnosable with a high degree of accuracy prior to
examination based upon a careful medical history. Of critical importance in the occupational
setting is the recording of the patient’s report of the mechanism(s) of injury. An accurate
record is also often critical in subsequent case review. Asking the patient open-ended
questions, such as those provided in the Medical History Questionnaire, allows the physician
to gauge the need for further information. Discussion or more specific inquiries will usually
produce the detail necessary for clinical decision-making. It may be helpful to use
standardized questionnaires such as the DASH (Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand)
(33)
outcome measure or the Upper Extremity Function Scale for Upper Extremity Disorders
(34)
.
See Table 1 on red flags for potentially serious elbow disorders.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Guided by the medical history, the physical examination should include:
●
General observation of the patient
●
Focused examination of the forearm, arm, elbow, and shoulder with discussion of
the symptoms
●
Neurovascular assessment
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

9

The physician should seek objective evidence including signs of pathology that are
consistent with the patient’s subjective complaints. In many cases, careful examination will
reveal one or more truly objective findings, such as swelling, deformity, atrophy, reflex
changes, or spasm (35).
Subjective Evidence: Symptoms
Subjective symptoms are perceptible only to the patient. Examples of subjective findings
include pain, tenderness to palpation, numbness and tingling, pain-limited decreased range
of motion, and weakness.
Objective Evidence: Signs
A sign is any objective evidence of a disease. Examples of objective evidence signs include
visible changes, swelling, deformity, redness, heat, reflex changes, spasm, palpable changes,
atrophy, nonresistant passive range of motion, and imaging findings. Such evidence is
perceptible to the examining physician, as opposed to the subjective sensations (symptoms)
of the patient (18). Objective evidence should be thoroughly documented in the medical
record especially for reference during future visits. For most patients with elbow disorders,
no truly objective physical examination evidence exists. Therefore, meticulous
documentation of the patient’s symptoms at each visit is particularly important.
Accurate interpretation of physical examination findings requires the physician to be
cognizant of the interplay between the performance of many physical examination
techniques and the patient’s responses. A number of physical examination findings are
actually a combination of objective and subjective evidence. Compliance with the maneuver
or a patient response is required for the interpretation of the results. Examples include
tenderness on palpation, reflexes, or ranges of motion or elicitation of pain with a maneuver
(such as resisted wrist extension inducing lateral or medial elbow pain).
Anatomy
The elbow has four basic movements – flexion, extension, pronation, and supination. From a
functional perspective of the muscles, the physician may look at the elbow based on the
three main groups of muscles/tendons:
1.
Those that attach to the lateral epicondyle or condyle – extend the wrist and
supinate the elbow.
2.
Those that attach to the medial epicondyle or condyle – flex the wrist and pronate
the elbow.
3.
Those that cross the elbow from the upper arm or shoulder – flex and extend the
elbow and also supinate and pronate, but do not insert into it (except for triceps into the
olecranon).
While there are many muscles and tendons associated with elbow and wrist movement, this
guideline will only address those that commonly cause elbow pain or produce referred pain
to the elbow (36).
Flexion of the elbow: The main flexors are the biceps brachii, brachialis, and brachioradialis
(31)
. The long head of the biceps brachii originates on the supraglenoid tuberosity, while the
short head originates on the coracoids process and insertions are on the tuberosity of the
radius and bicipital aponeurosis to the fascia of the forearm. The brachialis muscle arises
from the lower half of the anterior humerus and inserts on the tuberosity and coronoid
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

10

process of the ulna. The brachioradialis muscle originates on the lateral supracondylar ridge
and inserts on the radial styloid. Pertaining to the elbow, other than epicondylalgia, the
biceps brachii are most often involved in clinical tendinoses and ruptures.
Extension of the elbow: Triceps muscles (long, medial, and lateral heads) are the main
elbow extensors. They originate from the infraglenoid tuberosity of the scapula, posterior
aspect of the humerus and lateral aspect of the humerus. They insert on the posterior and
upper olecranon and fascia of the forearm. The anconeus originates from the posterior
aspect of the lateral epicondyle, inserts on the olecranon and upper posterior ulna, and is a
minor elbow extensor. Triceps tendinoses of the elbow occur, but are not clinically common
in employed populations.
Supination: The biceps is the main supinator. The supinator muscle also supinates the hand.
The supinator originates on the lateral epicondyle and ulna below the radial notch. It inserts
on the radial tubercle and oblique line of the radius.
Pronation: Pronation is accomplished by the pronator teres and pronator quadratus. The
pronator teres originates above the medial epicondyle and medial side of the coronoid
process of the ulna and inserts on the lateral side of the radius. The pronator quadratus
originates on the lower anterior shaft of the ulna and inserts on the medial anterior surface
of the distal radius.
A. FOCUSED ELBOW EXAMINATION
The physician should examine both elbows for comparison and differences should be noted
beginning with careful observation. This should include inspection for visible changes,
swelling, deformity, redness, heat, spasm, and atrophy. Atrophy of the muscles of the ulnar
or radial hand intrinsic muscles is an objective finding, arising only after weeks to months of
disuse or denervation. Deformities may include claw phenomenon. Deformities due to
fractures are often subtle. Dislocations may be associated with visible, objective abnormal
findings. Signs of infection or inflammation (redness, heat, swelling, tenderness, etc.) or
gross tumor (palpable mass) may also be obvious.
Next, active range of motion is assessed. If active range of motion is limited, then passive
range of motion is assessed to help determine if the limitation appears fixed or is rather
painful or otherwise limited. Movements to evaluate limitation include elbow flexion and
extension, forearm pronation and supination, wrist flexion, extension, and ulnar and radial
deviation. Limitation of motion or pain at the extremes of flexion or extension suggests an
intra-articular abnormality or at least a joint-associated abnormality. An apparent loss of
motion in one elbow may be equally present in the non-affected limb, indicating either a
congenital problem or voluntary limitation of movement, which in either case would be
unrelated to a unilateral injury.
Particularly in the setting of trauma, tests for joint integrity are necessary. These tests
include assessment for instability of the elbow including the pivot shift test for
posterolateral instability (lateral ulnar collateral ligament), and valgus and varus tests.
Palpation is performed on the elbow to ascertain points of tenderness. Palpation is also
performed to detect swelling, tumors, osteophytes, and other abnormalities. Individuals
with lateral epicondylalgia tend to have tenderness over the epicondyle proper, the radial
head, and/or two centimeters distant to the epicondyle (34,35,37,38). Similarly, those with
medial epicondylalgia tend to have tenderness either over the epicondyle and/or several
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

11

centimeters distal (37). Muscle-strength testing is often helpful. However, weakness in the
absence of atrophy is particularly difficult to assess. Pain-limited weakness is common and
makes determination of true muscular weakness substantially more difficult. Weakness on
the unaffected side should be noted.
Reflexes help to detect abnormalities in nerves, nerve roots, spinal cord, and higher level
functioning. Sensory examination of the elbow includes fine touch, two-point
discrimination, and vibratory sense and position sense in the distal extremity. For the vast
majority of common elbow problems, a full sensory examination is not required. However,
when symptoms that could represent a nervous system disorder are present, appropriate
examination is necessary.
The physician should generally examine one joint above and below the joint being
examined, particularly if symptoms are present elsewhere. Thus, examination of the
shoulder and forearm are required. Examination of the neck is also required in many
evaluations of the elbow to exclude cervical pathology as it is a common source of patients’
elbow complaints. Special examination maneuvers are performed to help diagnose an elbow
disorder (23,31). Common maneuvers include:
●
Resisted wrist extension. Performed with the shoulder forward flexed
approximately 60 degrees and the arm extended, this maneuver will produce pain in the
lateral elbow in patients with lateral epicondylalgia.
●
Resisted wrist flexion. Pain is produced in the medial elbow in those with medial
epicondylalgia.
●
Resisted middle finger extension. Performed similarly to resisted wrist extension,
pain is produced in the lateral elbow with resisted middle finger extension and is indicative
of lateral epicondylalgia. Some consider this sign more important in radial tunnel syndrome,
but quality studies documenting this do not exist and it is positive in many patients with
lateral epicondylalgia.
●
Resisted supination. This maneuver is positive for weakness in those with ruptures
of the biceps tendon, biceps tendinoses, musculocutaneous nerve, C5 or C6 nerve root
problems. Patients with lateral epicondylalgia and biceps tendinoses will tend to have pain
with this maneuver.
●
Resisted pronation. This maneuver demonstrates weakness in those with rupture of
the pronator origin from the medial epicondyle, and median nerve, C6 and C7 nerve root
problems. Patients with medial epicondylalgia will tend to have pain with this maneuver.
●
Shaking hands sign. Patients with significant lateral epicondylalgia will tend to have
reproduction of their pain with a firm handshake. This test may also be positive with radial
nerve entrapment.
Another test used to diagnose elbow disorders is the Hoffman-Tinel’s test. However, it
should be noted that this test is increasingly thought to have low value in the diagnosis of
any peripheral neuropathy.
B. NEUROVASCULAR SCREENING
Physicians should assess the neurological and vascular status of the elbow and distal upper
extremity, especially following dislocation, fractures, or other substantial trauma or if other
symptoms suggest the need for this evaluation. Evidence of problems with the median,
ulnar, and radial nerve distributions should be sought. Evaluation for evidence of cervical
disc disease associated with radiculopathy that radiates to the elbow should also be
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

12

performed. C5 radiculopathy may result in weakness of elbow flexion, and T1 lesions may
weaken the hand intrinsic muscles in a manner that is similar to entrapment of the ulnar
nerve. C6 radiculopathy can cause lateral elbow pain, and as noted above, should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of lateral elbow pain. Concomitant neck pain or
stiffness, and/or thumb tingling can be helpful indications in that differential analysis. Both
left and right sides should be examined for consistency.
C. ASSESSING RED FLAGS
Physical examination evidence of neurovascular compromise, fracture, unreduced
dislocation, infection, or tumor that correlates with the medical history and with test results
may indicate a need for immediate treatment and/or consultation. The examination may
further reinforce or reduce suspicion of these diagnoses.

DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
The criteria presented in Table 2 follow the clinical thought process, from the mechanism of
illness or injury, to unique symptoms and signs of a particular disorder, to test results (if any
tests are needed to guide treatment at this stage). Elbow disorders, as described by the
patient, can sometimes be consistent with radiating symptoms from the neck or shoulder,
and the examining physician’s diagnostic acumen is important in determining the source.
For example, mid-upper-arm pain on arm elevation is most likely related to a problem
originating in the shoulder area, not the elbow, although patients may have pain in both
areas. It is important to note that lateral elbow pain can be due to cervical disc disease (C6),
radial nerve entrapment (including radial tunnel syndrome), synovitis due to degeneration,
or true epicondylitis (enthesitis) (39). A complaint of tingling and/or numbness in the fourth
and fifth fingers is usually due to ulnar nerve impingement at the elbow, C8 cervical
radiculopathy, or impingement of the ulnar nerve at the wrist. Thoracic outlet syndrome can
be considered, although that condition is generally believed to be quite uncommon (see
Shoulder Disorders guideline). For the differential diagnosis of lateral epicondylalgia, C6
radiculopathy is believed to be the most common alternate diagnosis and not infrequently
presents with lateral elbow pain and paresthesias in the thumb. The differential diagnosis of
medial epicondylalgia similarly includes C8 radiculopathy presenting as medial elbow pain
and paresthesias in the fourth and fifth digits.
Medial collateral ligament problems may also present with medial elbow pain. Concomitant
existence of medial epicondylalgia with ulnar neuropathy at the elbow frequently occurs. In
cases of complaints that cannot be classified as a specific pathophysiological condition, a
diagnosis of non-specific pain should be used. This is far preferable to specific labeling,
which may not be accurate. Non-specific or regional pain will more frequently be the most
appropriate diagnosis if there are no specific physical findings. The criteria presented
in Table 2 list the probable diagnosis or injury, potential mechanism(s) of illness or injury,
symptoms, signs, and appropriate tests and results to consider in assessment and
treatment.
For most patients presenting with non-traumatic elbow disorders, special studies are not
needed during the first 4 weeks. Most patients improve quickly, provided red flag conditions
are ruled out. Also, of note, a number of patients with elbow symptoms will have associated
disease such as diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, renal disease, and one or more of the
arthritides which are often heretofore undiagnosed. When medical history and/or physical

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

13

examination findings indicate or other risk factors are present, testing for these or other
comorbid condition(s) is recommended.

TESTING PROCEDURES
Antibodies
There are numerous antibodies that are markers for specific rheumatic diseases (e.g.,
rheumatoid factor, anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-Sm, anti-Ro, anti-La for rheumatoid
arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjogren’s, mixed connective tissue disorder, etc.).
Patients with rheumatic disorders are at increased risk for degenerative joint disease of the
elbow (40,41,42,43,44).
Elbow Arthroscopy
Arthroscopy of the elbow has been used for diagnosis and treatment of some patients with
elbow disorders (45,46,47); however, indications for either diagnostic or therapeutic
procedures are not well defined with quality studies.
Bone Scans
Bone scans involve intravenous administration of a radioactive tracer medication that is
preferentially concentrated in areas of metabolic activity in bone (48,49). The radioactivity is
then detected by a large sensor, and converted into images of the skeleton. There are many
causes for abnormal radioactive uptake, including metastases, infection, inflammatory
arthropathies, fracture or other significant bone trauma. Thus, positive bone scans are not
highly specific. Bone scans have been used for diagnosis of early osteonecrosis prior to
findings on x-ray, among other uses (50,51,52,53).
Computerized Tomography (CT)
Computerized tomography remains an important imaging procedure, particularly for bony
anatomy, whereas MRI is superior for soft tissue abnormalities (54,55,56). CT may be useful for
elbow joint abnormalities where advanced imaging of the bones is required. CT may be
helpful for evaluation of AVN and following traumatic dislocations or arthroplastyassociated recurrent dislocations. CT also may be useful to evaluate patients with
contraindications for MRI (most typically an implanted metallic-ferrous device) (55).
C-Reactive Protein, Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate, and Other Non-Specific Inflammatory
Markers
There are many markers of inflammation that may be measured serologically. These include
C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), ferritin, and an elevated
total protein-albumin gap (57,58,59,60).
Electromyography and Nerve Conduction Studies (Electrodiagnostic Studies)
Electrodiagnostic (ED) studies have been used to confirm diagnostic impressions of other
peripheral nerve entrapments, including all peripheral nerves in the upper extremity. They
may be particularly helpful to distinguish a peripheral entrapment from cervical
radiculopathy (61,62) (see Cervical and Thoracic Spine Disorders guideline for discussion of ED
studies for evaluation of spine-related disorders that may present as elbow pain). NCS and
EMG may be normal, particularly in some mild cases of neuropathies. If ED studies are
negative, tests may be repeated later in the course of treatment if symptoms persist. It is
also important to recognize that ED studies are abnormal in a considerable proportion of
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

14

patients who are without symptoms (63). Thus, ED studies in a patient with a low pre-test
probability of peripheral nerve entrapment may result in inappropriate diagnosis (64,65).
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is considered the imaging test of choice for viewing soft
tissues (including ligamentous injuries around the elbow). MRI is helpful for evaluating
extent of biceps tendinosis and ruptures. MRI is considered the gold standard for evaluating
osteonecrosis after x-rays (66,67,68,69,70,71,72,73,74,75). However, for most elbow disorders, MRI is
not used as an imaging procedure.
Roentgenograms (X-Rays)
X-rays show bony structure and remain the initial test for evaluation of most cases of elbow
pain (76,77). Two or three views are generally performed (78,79,80,81,82,83,84,85,86,87).
Single Proton Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) and Positron Emission
Tomography (PET)
Single proton emission computed tomography (SPECT) is a 3-dimensional imaging technique
in which radionucleotide tracers that release gamma radiation are used to create
multiplanar re-formations. Positron emission tomography (PET) is another major technique
that investigates functional and, to a lesser degree, anatomical details within the brain, but
uses positron-emitting radionucleotides.
Ultrasound
Diagnostic ultrasound has been used to evaluate the elbow joint, especially for
epicondylalgia (88).

INITIAL CARE
Initial treatment should generally be guided by implementing the strongest evidence-based
recommendations that are considered 1st-line interventions. Exceptions include treatments
that are accepted as best practices, but have not been subjected to RCTs or crossover trials
(e.g., antibiotics for diabetics with “dirty” lacerations). Careful consideration of the
indications and limitations described in the full text for each recommendation is critical to
understanding the best application for each intervention. If treatment response is
inadequate (i.e., if symptoms and activity limitations continue), 2nd- and 3rd-line
recommendations may be considered (89). Physicians should consider the possibilities of
diagnosed and previously undiagnosed medical diseases such as diabetes mellitus,
hypothyroidism, or various arthritides.
Comfort is often a patient’s primary concern. Nonprescription analgesics will provide
sufficient pain relief for most patients with acute or subacute elbow symptoms. If the
patient’s response to treatment is inadequate (i.e., symptoms and activity limitations
continue), pharmaceuticals, orthotics, or physical methods can be prescribed. Co-morbid
conditions, adverse effects, cost, and clinician and patient preferences should be
considerations in guiding the choice of recommendations.
For treatments of uncertain effectiveness that are free of undue risk and individual and
aggregate cost, a therapeutic trial may be appropriate if adverse effects and effectiveness
are carefully followed. The effectiveness of such a trial should be measured by objective
findings appropriate for the patient and the intervention, and should be documented
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

15

accordingly. The trial should be promptly discontinued if it does not result in subjective or
functional improvement. Part of the initial treatment plan for all disorders should include
patient education. For most diagnoses this is critical to successful treatment.
Patient Education Issues
●
Patient education is best accomplished if similar advice is given by all health care
team members.
●
Patients need reassurance that elbow pain is common and generally resolves with
time.
●
Work-related and activity modifications are often helpful.
●
Biceps tendinosis generally responds well to non-operative management. Serious
biceps tears usually require surgical repairs and the majority of patients regain full function.
Partial tears require judgment regarding whether operative or non-operative approaches
are likely to result in better outcomes for a patient. The need for surgery is thought to
increase with the size of the tear.
●
Olecranon bursitis and epicondylalgia are common and usually resolve completely.
●
Pronator syndrome, radial, and ulnar neuropathies generally have a good prognosis,
although some cases require surgery.
●
Fractures and dislocations require urgent treatment, and many (especially radial
head fractures) have good prognoses. Alternately, complex or compound fractures may
have poor prognoses, although nearly all patients have good functional recoveries after
treatment.
●
Osteoarthrosis generally responds to treatment with NSAIDs or acetaminophen.
●
Patients should be encouraged to maintain a high level of function; however,
modifications may be helpful in reducing stresses to the elbow.
●
Rest and immobilization are discouraged in the management of elbow disorders
other than fractures, as they usually cause further disability and prolong treatment.
Occupational Issues
●
Patients with elbow fractures may require more time off work, especially if onehanded work is unavailable. In general however, patients should be encouraged to return to
normal activity or work as soon as possible. Some situations require modified duty.
However, the more activities are reduced, the more time generally required to rehabilitate
the patient.
●
If elbow pain is present, reduced activity may be necessary if the physical
requirements of the job exceed the patient’s tolerance.
●
Modification of offending or aggravating activity(ies) may require consultation with a
qualified professional trained in ergonomic analysis, particularly in the setting of high jobphysical demands, especially high force combined with high repetition.
●
Work technique may need to be changed to address for example, excessive grip
force or sustained wrist extension.
●
Ergonomic biomechanical advice on the efficient use of the elbow may be helpful.
For example, with lateral epicondylalgia, it may help to lift with palm up and not palm down
to reduce stress on the lateral elbow (caused by resisted wrist extension). For medial
epicondylalgia, it may be helpful to lift palm down to reduce stress on the medial elbow
(caused by resisted wrist flexion).
●
A functional capacity evaluation (FCE) can establish appropriate physical capacity for
work although results should be interpreted with caution and testing should be preferably
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

16

conducted by a health professional (e.g., occupational or physical therapist) well
experienced in dealing with patients who may self-limit due to pain. Non-physical factors,
return to work programs and participatory ergonomics, should be addressed as needed.
Empower patients to accept responsibility for managing their recovery.
Adaptive Equipment/Assistive Devices and Other Allied Health Therapies
●
Elbow straps (proximal forearm epicondylitis bands) may be helpful for
epicondylalgia.
●
Wrist splints are often helpful for patients with radial neuropathies and pronator
syndrome. Some clinicians also prescribe wrist splints for lateral epicondylalgia.
●
When immobilization is utilized, range-of-motion exercises should usually involve
the elbow, wrist, and shoulder to avoid adhesive capsulitis (“frozen shoulder”).
●
Elbow braces are commonly prescribed for nocturnal use in patients with ulnar
neuropathy at the elbow.
●
Ice, heat, ultrasound, and other similar modalities are sometimes used for elbow
pain in the clinical setting.
●
Consider heat and ice as a part of self care at home, particularly in the acute pain
setting. Heat/ice should provide temporary relief of symptoms, but can reinforce pain and
illness behaviors in persons with chronic pain. While many believe heat is not indicated in
the acute phase of many injuries, acute low back pain has been demonstrated to be
successfully treated with heat. Quality evidence is lacking to oppose the use of heat for
acute injuries.
●
There is no evidence to support prolonged and repetitive use of therapeutic
modalities (e.g., massage, electrical therapies, manipulation, and acupuncture) result in
meaningful, functional improvements. Long-term treatment, particularly if there is no
documentation of functional improvement, is not indicated in managing patients with
chronic pain.
Exercise Issues
●
Graded exercises to assist in achieving a return to normal function are indicated.
●
Gentle exercises are useful to regain normal range of motion in the acute pain and
post-operative settings. Aggressive stretching may be contraindicated if symptoms are
aggravated. It is also important for patients to understand that while exercises after surgery
can have some discomfort, they should not experience significant increase in pain or new
onset of swelling.
●
Quality studies of exercises for treatment for elbow disorders are lacking. By
inference from studies of many other MSDs, conditioning, aerobic and strengthening
exercises are likely most helpful for the rehabilitation of most chronic elbow pain
conditions. Consultation with a physical or occupational therapist to determine the most
appropriate exercises for the patient is in order.
Medications
●
Initial management of most elbow pain conditions is with NSAIDs and
acetaminophen.
●
Topical NSAIDs are effective for epicondylalgia.
●
Opioids should be avoided for most patients. Opioids might be needed for managing
select patients with acute trauma during the initial post-injury period.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

17

●
Glucocorticoid injections are indicated for select use in patients with epicondylalgia,
particularly if other treatments have been unsuccessful.
Other Issues
●
If significant symptoms causing self-limitations or restrictions persist beyond 4 to 6
weeks, referral for specialty evaluation (e.g., occupational medicine, physical medicine and
rehabilitation, or orthopaedic surgery) may be indicated to assist in confirming the
provisional diagnosis and in determining further management.
●
Non-physical factors (i.e., psychiatric, psychosocial, workplace, or socioeconomic
issues) should be investigated and addressed, particularly in cases of delayed recovery or
delayed return to work. These factors are often not overt and specific inquiries are required
to identify these issues.

FOLLOW-UP VISITS
Patients with potentially work-related elbow symptoms should generally have a follow-up
visit approximately every 3 (severe disorders) to 7 days (typical disorder severity) to monitor
medication use and/or a physical or occupational therapist visit for counseling regarding
contributing physical factor avoidance (e.g., reducing force, avoiding static positions), sleep
posture, and other concerns. More frequent follow-up is usually required for patients who
are not working. Education is recommended to include answering questions and making
sessions interactive so that the patient is involved in their recovery, including identifying
potential barriers to recovery and return to normal function and work. More specific
guidance for follow-up visits may be included in the discussion of each disorder topic.

MONITORING / AUDITING CRITERIA
The clinician is recommended to assure:
1.
Imaging of the elbow is not done at initial evaluation for non-traumatic injuries.
Target <10%
2.
Lateral epicondylalgia patients are treated with an NSAID absent a contraindication.
Target 100%
3.
Lateral epicondylalgia patients without sufficient results from NSAID and elbow strap
are treated with iontophoresis with either glucocorticosteroid or NSAID. Target >75%
4.
Ulnar neuropathy at the elbow patients are taught to sleep with the elbows
extended. Target 100%
5.
Patients with cubital tunnel ulnar neuropathy at the elbow who fail non-operative
management undergo simple aponeurotic release. Target >80%

ERGONOMIC INTERVENTIONS
In order to facilitate recovery and prevent recurrence of elbow musculoskeletal disorders,
the physician may recommend work and activity modifications or ergonomic redesign of the
workplace (90). The employer’s role in accommodating activity limitations and preventing
further problems through ergonomic changes is crucial in hastening the employee’s return
to full activity. In some cases it may be desirable to conduct an ergonomic analysis of the
activities that may be contributing to the symptoms. A broad range of ergonomic surveys
and instruments is available for estimating duration of hand intensive activities, grasp
repetition rates, pinch force, part or tool weights, reach distance, frequency of motion, and
wrist and hand postures, as well as psychological factors such as organizational relationships
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

18

and job satisfaction. Such detailed measures may be necessary or useful for modifying
activity, redesigning the workstation, or recommending organizational and management
relief. Such situations may require a therapy plan of care to include an ergonomic analysis or
call for referral to certified professional ergonomists, a human factors engineer or other
professionals with the capabilities to perform these analyses.

RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS
Return-to-work programs have not been well studied among patients with elbow disorders
(see Chronic Pain guideline). Several studies suggest that job physical demands, lack of job
accommodation, and psychosocial conditions are the most important factors in predicting
work disability (91,92,93). In the United States, these programs are typically informal, involve
early, if not immediate, interventions involving the patient, clinician, workplace supervisor
and insurer to return the worker to productive work. Some involve physical or occupational
therapists, particularly if the employer has difficulty identifying modified duty positions,
although many occupational physicians also perform those services. More formalized
evaluations are sometimes performed for patients with chronic lost-time injuries. Return-towork programs in Europe typically involve only patients with chronic pain with long-standing
lost-time. They have typically involved a team of clinicians, formal meetings and return to
work activities.

WORK ACTIVITIES
Table 3 provides consensus recommendations on activity modification and duration of
absence from work. These guidelines are intended for patients without comorbidity or
complicating factors. The recommendations are targets to provide a guide from the
perspective of physiologic recovery. Key factors to consider in disability duration are age
and job activities. By communicating with patients and employers, physicians can make it
clear that:
●
Limit forceful wrist movement that involve extrinsic muscles attached at the elbow.
●
Forceful repetitive grasping may increase elbow symptoms.
●
Sustained or repeated hyperflexion of the elbow may increase ulnar nerve
symptoms.
●
Modified work and workplace activity guides may allow for recovery or time to
(re)build activity tolerance through exercise.
Significant reductions in unnecessary lost work time can occur when the patient, physician,
and employer work together to develop and apply modified work activities (94,95,96,97,98).

BICEPS AND TRICEPS TENDINOSIS
OVERVIEW
Biceps tendinosis (or tendinitis) is a true muscle strain involving the muscle-tendon junction
of the biceps brachii (99,100). (See ACOEM Shoulder Disorders Guideline for bicipital tendinitis
and ruptures at the shoulder.) It typically occurs in the setting of the use of high force,
particularly if unaccustomed (99,101). Symptoms are non-radiating pain in the muscle-tendon
junction and there are generally no paraesthesias (102). Pain limited weakness is a common
complaint. While frequently considered two discrete entities of tendinosis vs. rupture, there
is considerable overlap ranging from mild to moderate to severe ruptures. The greater the
degree of rupture, the greater the likelihood surgery may be needed to attempt to restore
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

19

the greatest degree of function, particularly in working age patients. The overall quality of
evidence has been notably poor (102,103).
Triceps tendinosis (or tendinitis) is a true muscle strain involving the muscle-tendon junction
of the triceps. It is believed to be analogous to biceps tendinosis, including high force
mechanism of injury (99,100,101,104,105). There are no quality trials for treatment of this
condition; thus, treatment by analogy to biceps tendinoses and tears is recommended
including surgical repairs (see above) (99,100,104,105).

RISK AND CAUSATION
WORK RELATEDNESS
Individuals seem to vary in their susceptibility to tendinoses with some never apparently
experiencing this condition. Many people experience mild tendon problems, but recover.
Others develop chronic tendinosis that is not infrequently attributed to physical exertion.
Many individuals develop chronic tendon injuries in multiple places of the body. Usually, a
careful medical history will reveal some contributing associated factor(s), but tendon injury
occasionally occurs without an obvious cause.
Theoretically, the tendinosis cycle begins when breakdown exceeds repair. One theory is
that physical exertion causes micro-injuries that accumulate with time. The tensile strength
of collagen is exceeded, and the tendon tries to repair itself, but the cells produce new
collagen with an abnormal structure and composition. The new collagen has an abnormally
high Type III/Type I ratio. Experiments have shown that the excess Type III collagen at the
expense of Type I collagen weakens the tendon, making it prone to further injury. Part of
the problem may be that the new collagen fibers are less organized into the normal parallel
structure, making the tendon less able to withstand tensile stress along the direction of the
tendon (106). Therefore, according to this theory, tendinosis is a slow accumulation of minor
injuries that are not repaired properly and that leave the tendon vulnerable to additional
injury. This failed healing process may be one reason why some people with tendinosis do
not completely clinically heal following an injury and encounter difficulties in returning to
their previous level of activity. Once the tendinosis cycle starts, the tendon is believed to
rarely heal back to its pre-injury state, although many patients appear to clinically resolve.
Relative rest is thought to be an essential part of the acute healing process for tendinosis,
too much rest causes deconditioning of muscles and tendons. Also, some individuals heal
without any change in physical activities. The weaker muscles and tendons leave the area
more vulnerable to injury. Thus, the area may become weaker on a large scale as well as on
a cellular scale. This cycle of injury/rest/deconditioning/more injury may be difficult to
break. Gradual, careful physical exercises are believed to be most effective.

DIAGNOSIS
INITIAL ASSESSMENT
X-rays are sometimes used to evaluate patients with biceps tendinosis and tears, although
MRI and ultrasound are more commonly utilized.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is often used to evaluate patients with biceps tendinosis
and tears (107).
Ultrasound has been used to evaluate patients with biceps tendinosis and tears.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

20

There are no quality studies for evaluation or treatment of biceps tendinosis or tears.
Patients with severe or complete ruptures should be referred to a surgeon to evaluate the
need for surgical repair. Other patients should receive treatment including activity
limitations and pain management strategies generally centering on NSAIDs.
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
Biceps tendinosis is diagnosed based on a combination of typical inciting event (usually high
force exertion such as maximal lift, or unaccustomed stereotypical high force use) combined
with characteristic localized elbow pain to the affected myotendinous junctions as they
insert in the distal biceps’ tendon in the distal upper arm. Focal tenderness is present over
the affected, disrupted junctions. Ecchymosis may be present and is generally proportionate
to the degree of tear of the junctions and/or rupture. Biceps ruptures involve a larger
degree of tear of the myotendinous junctions up to, and including a complete rupture of
one half or, rarely, both of the biceps brachii. These ruptures have a greater degree of
associated weakness for elbow flexion. The physical examination also includes palpable
abnormalities sometimes described as a “ropey” feeling biceps in the area of the insertion.
An accompanying hematoma is often present.

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
X-RAYS
X-RAYS FOR BICEPS TENDINOSIS OR RUPTURES
Recommended
X-rays are recommended for biceps tendinosis or ruptures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
X-rays are not the first imaging study for consideration, as MRI or ultrasound is generally
preferable. However, x-rays are particularly warranted if there is an acute traumatic event
to help rule-out fracture. X-rays are not invasive, have low adverse effects, and are low cost.
Therefore, they are recommended.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (MRI)
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (MRI) FOR BICEPS TENDINOSIS OR RUPTURES
Recommended
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is recommended for biceps tendinosis or ruptures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Patients with moderate to severe biceps tendinosis or ruptures, particularly in whom the
need for surgery is uncertain. Patients with complete ruptures generally do not require MRI
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

21

as it usually does not alter the need for surgery. Patients with mild tears generally do not
require MRI as the test does not alter the treatment plan and the good prognosis.
Rationale
MRIs are likely the most common imaging study to evaluate the degree of rupture. MRIs
may assist in evaluating the need for surgery particularly in those patients with moderately
severe tears in whom the degree of rupture may help identify whether surgery is likely to be
beneficial. MRIs are not invasive, have low adverse effects, and are high cost. Therefore,
they are recommended.

ULTRASOUND
DIAGNOSTIC ULTRASOUND FOR BICEPS TENDINOSIS OR RUPTURES
Recommended
Diagnostic ultrasound is recommended for the evaluation and diagnosis of biceps tendinosis
or ruptures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Patients with moderate to severe biceps tendinosis or ruptures, particularly those for whom
the need for surgery is uncertain. Patients with complete ruptures generally do not require
diagnostic ultrasound as it usually does not alter the need for surgery. Patients with mild
tears generally do not require ultrasound as the test does not alter the treatment plan and
the good prognosis. Ultrasound should generally not be performed in addition to MRI as it
usually does not add additional information of benefit.
Rationale
After MRI, diagnostic ultrasound is likely the second most common imaging study to
evaluate the degree of biceps tendinosis or rupture. Ultrasound may assist in evaluating the
need for surgery particularly in those patients with moderately severe tears in whom the
degree of rupture may help identify whether surgery is likely to be beneficial. Ultrasound is
not invasive, has low adverse effects, and is moderate cost. Therefore, it is recommended.

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
ACTIVITY MODIFICATION AND EXERCISE
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

22

EXERCISES FOR BICEPS TENDINOSIS, RUPTURES, OR POSTOPERATIVE PATIENTS
Recommended
Range-of-motion transitioning to strengthening exercises is recommended for treatment of
biceps tendinosis, ruptures and post-operative patients.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
All biceps tendinosis patients are candidates.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Patients require individualized treatment plans based on pre-injury conditioning, injury
severity, stage and progress. Generally, exercises begin with gentle stretching and progress
to strengthening. Many, if not most patients require formal therapy. Mildly affected
patients may recover sufficiently with fewer appointments. Two to three appointments per
week for 4 to 6 weeks may be needed for more severely affected patients, followed by
weekly appointments for another 4 to 6 weeks. Mildly affected patients who require
supervised therapy may require as few as two or three appointments to institute a home
exercise program that is gradually progressed.
Indications for discontinuation
Varies widely depending on severity, preinjury conditioning and job demands. Generally
requires at least 2 to 3 weeks of supervision, with more severely affected patients, patients
with high job physical demands and post-operative patients requiring up to 3 months.
Rationale
There are no quality trials that evaluate exercises to rehabilitate non-operatively treated
biceps tendinosis and ruptures. Exercises are believed to be critical for rehabilitation of
these injuries. Transitioning from stretching to strengthening is required. Supervised
therapy is often needed for more severely affected patients and post-operative patients.
Workers with high job physical demands also frequently require supervised therapy to help
assist with achieving an appropriate level of capacity prior to attempting return to high job
demands. Exercises are not invasive and have low adverse effects. Costs range from low to
high depending on numbers of appointments required. Exercise is recommended.

MEDICATIONS
NSAIDS FOR BICEPS TENDINOSIS AND TEARS
Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

23

NSAIDs are recommended for the treatment of pain from biceps tendinosis and tears.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Most patients with biceps tendinosis and tears require pain medication for pain control and
most are likely candidates for treatment with NSAIDs. Patients at high risk for
gastrointestinal bleeding may be better candidates for treatment with acetaminophen or a
COX-2 inhibitor. (See Hip and Groin Disorders guideline.)
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Dosing per manufacturer’s recommendation. Many patients have sufficient pain that
scheduled dosing is recommended in the acute healing phase. As-needed dosing may be
sufficient for mild cases or those with less pain.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, of development of adverse effects.
Rationale
There is no quality evidence for use of NSAIDs for treatment of these patients, however they
address pain management. NSAIDs are not invasive, have low adverse effects, are low cost
and are thus recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of NSAIDs and acetaminophen for biceps
tendinosis and tears.
ACETAMINOPHEN FOR BICEPS TENDINOSIS AND TEARS
Recommended
Acetaminophen is recommended for the treatment of pain from biceps tendinosis and
tears.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

Indications
Most patients with biceps tendinosis and tears require pain medication for pain control and
most are likely candidates for treatment with NSAIDs. Patients at high risk for

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

24

gastrointestinal bleeding may be better candidates for treatment with acetaminophen or a
COX-2 inhibitor. (See Hip and Groin Disorders guideline).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Dosing per manufacturer’s recommendation. Many patients have sufficient pain that
scheduled dosing is recommended in the acute healing phase. As-needed dosing may be
sufficient for mild cases or those with less pain.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, of development of adverse effects.
Rationale
There is no quality evidence for use of NSAIDs for treatment of these patients, however they
address pain management. NSAIDs are not invasive, have low adverse effects, are low cost
and are thus recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of NSAIDs and acetaminophen for biceps
tendinosis and tears.
OPIOIDS FOR SELECT PATIENTS WITH BICEPS TENDINOSIS
Sometimes Recommended
Opioids are recommended for treatment of select patients with pain from moderately
severe to severe biceps tendinosis or ruptures, particularly with nocturnal sleep disruption.
Post-operative patients are also candidates.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Select patients with severe pain from moderately severe to severe biceps tendinosis and
ruptures with insufficient control from other means, including acetaminophen and NSAIDs
or with contraindications for NSAIDs. Post-operative patients are candidates. Considerable
cautions are recommended concerning opioids and minimum numbers of doses should be
prescribed as duration of treatment for elbow sprains is usually limited.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
As-needed dosing with generally nocturnal dosing preferred for many patients. Postoperative patients may require scheduled dosing for the first few post-operative days. Most
non-operative patients should be weaned off opioids within 7 to 10 days after the event.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

25

Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain sufficiently to not require opioids, consumption that does not follow
prescription instructions, adverse effects.
Rationale
Many patients will require a few days of treatment with opioids in the acute post-operative
period, while non-operative patients do not generally require opioids. Patients with
moderately severe to severe biceps tendinosis or inadequate control with NSAIDs may
require opioids. There is no quality evidence for use of opioids for treatment of these
patients, however they address pain management. There are major concerns regarding
adverse effects of opioids including mortality. However, it is presumed that few doses
combined with short term use provides sufficient margin of safety for these medications.
Opioids are not invasive, are low cost, but have high adverse effect profiles. They are
recommended for limited duration use in select patients.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of opioids for patients with biceps tendinosis
or ruptures.
ANTIEMETICS
See the ACOEM Antiemetics Guideline.

DEVICES
SLINGS AND SPLINTS FOR BICEPS TENDINOSIS, RUPTURES AND POSTOPERATIVE PATIENTS
Recommended
Slings and splints are recommended for the treatment of biceps tendinosis, ruptures, and
post-operative patients.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Moderate to severely affected patients, especially for the first week. Post-operative patients
also usually treated with posterior splints for approximately 2 weeks (range 1 to 6 weeks)
(Rineer et al., 2009, Sutton et al., 2010).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally should be used for less than 7 to 10 days with gradual reduction in use. Range of
motion exercises of the elbow and shoulder are recommended several times daily for nonoperative patients while using a sling or splint to prevent after complications from reduced
ranges of motion. Operative patients require rest prior to resumption of exercises.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

26

Rationale
There are no quality trials. Slings and splints have been used to treat biceps tendinosis and
ruptures. Prolonged use is believed to result in reduced ranges of motion and other
complications such as adhesive capsulitis. Range-of-motion exercises are recommended
while using a sling or splint. Slings and splints are not invasive, have low adverse effects, are
low to moderate cost, and are recommended.

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
SURGICAL REPAIR FOR DISTAL BICEPS RUPTURES
Recommended
Surgical repair of distal biceps ruptures is recommended.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Biceps tendon ruptures that are either complete, large or in select patients with moderately
severe biceps tendinosis patients who fail to adequately progress with non-operative care
with which they have demonstrated compliance. Patients with high job physical demands
but only moderate tears are also candidates for surgery to attempt to regain sufficient
function to return to those job tasks.
Rationale
Quality studies are not available on surgery for biceps ruptures. There are multiple
reconstruction procedures involving local repair, autografts and allografts (Hamer et al.,
2008, Boyd et al., 1961, Failla et al., 1990, Hovelius et al., 1977, Kelly et al., 2000,
D'Alessandro et al., 1993). There is some evidence suggesting higher surgical complication
rates among those over 3 to 12 weeks post-rupture (Kelly et al., 2000, Darlis et al., 2006,
Kaplan et al., 2002, Morrison et al., 2002, Ramsey, 1999, Sanchez-Sotelo et al., 2002, Sharma
et al., 2004, Strauch et al., 1997). There is not quality evidence of benefits due to the low
incidence and severity of these issues (Hamer et al., 2008). However, while surgery is high
cost, invasive, and has some potential for adverse effects, outcomes appear much better
with surgery as this muscle is the main forearm flexor. Thus, while there is insufficient
evidence, surgery for a ruptured biceps is recommended.

PROGNOSIS
Patients are often instructed to perform gentle range-of-motion exercises within pain-free
range a few times a day to maintain as normal a range of motion during healing as practical.
Excessive stretching however should generally be avoided during the acute healing phase.
Heavy or moderately heavy forceful use should also be avoided in the acute healing phase.
In addition, interventions are provided to address modifications to performance of ADLs and
IADLs.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

27

FOLLOW-UP CARE
MONITORING PROGRESS
Patients should be re-evaluated approximately every 7 to 14 days to evaluate progress. If
there is a lack of progress, diagnostic testing (see above) and/or referral for potential
surgical repair should be considered.

BICEPS AND TRICEPS STRAINS AND TEARS
OVERVIEW
A strain consists of a partial or complete disruption of a myotendinous junction. A biceps
strain involves one or both tendons of the biceps brachii at the elbow. Bicipital tendinosis
involves the long head of the biceps at the shoulder and is a more common condition
(see ACOEM Shoulder Disorders Guideline); it is sometimes also referred to as biceps strain.
High-force activities generally cause biceps strains and tears, particularly when
unaccustomed activities are involved. Prior strains presumably increase the probability of a
future strain or tear. A complete muscular tear of the biceps may occur. Strains are treated
by removal from high-force activities, and NSAIDs and therapy are used for more severely
affected cases. Severe or complete biceps tears are usually treated surgically. Triceps
tendon strains and tears are comparable to the biceps strains although less common. The
triceps insertion on the olecranon is involved and treatment is similar to that recommended
for biceps strains.

RISK AND CAUSATION
WORK RELATEDNESS
Biceps strains and ruptures involve myotendinous strains in the biceps insertion(s) at the
elbow. Symptoms usually occur acutely and are associated with a maximal forceful use.
These injuries are considered more analogous to acute injuries than diseases, although
repeated unaccustomed use may have precipitated the event. Thus, the nature of the
forceful unaccustomed use determines whether the condition is work-related.

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
See also recommendations on the treatment of Biceps Ruptures.

REHABILITATION
EDUCATION FOR ELBOW DISORDERS
Recommended
Education is recommended for patients with elbow disorders.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Frequency/Dose/Duration
One or two appointments for educational purposes. Additional appointments may be
needed if education is combined with occupational or physical therapy treatments. Follow-

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

28

up educational visit(s) for more severe disorders as part of a progression towards normal
functional use is sometimes helpful.
Rationale
There are no quality studies specifically evaluating efficacy of patient education for utility or
necessity in treatment of elbow disorders. Yet, for many disorders (e.g., relationship
between elbow hyperflexion and ulnar neuropathies, cast management) education appears
essential. Some clinicians accomplish this in the course of extended patient visits, while
others routinely refer patients to an occupational or physical therapist for education.
Regardless of the approach, a few appointments for educational purposes are
recommended for select patients. The number of appointments is dependent on the
diagnosis, severity of the condition, and co-existing conditions. Although education is
usually incorporated as part of the overall treatment plan, an additional 1 or 2
appointments for purely educational purposes may be helpful midway through a treatment
course for the more severely affected patient. In addition, education is low cost and this is
recommended.
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SEVERE ELBOW MSDS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against return-to-work programs for acute, severe elbow
MSDs.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis (see Low Back Disorders and
Chronic Pain guidelines for additional studies).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

29

RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC ELBOW
MSDS
Recommended
Return-to-work programs are recommended for treatment of subacute or chronic elbow
MSDs, particularly patients with significant lost time.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.

PROGNOSIS
Biceps strains may not require work limitations if mild and the patient has the ability to
avoid the high force activity. However, the more forceful the work and more significant the
symptoms, the more likely work limitations will be needed for biceps strains. Biceps
tears/ruptures require work limitations during the recovery phase that typically include no
use for a period of at least a couple weeks followed by graded increase in activities.

ELBOW CONTUSION
OVERVIEW
A contusion is an injury of a part without a break in the skin and with a subcutaneous
hemorrhage. It is an acute injury with bruising (18).
Contusions result from blunt force trauma that ruptures blood vessels, producing bruises
(ecchymoses). Common occupational causes include falls, motor vehicle accidents, and
being struck by objects. These are generally self-limited conditions absent underlying
structural damage. Treatment usually consists of ice, acetaminophen, NSAIDs, and relative
rest.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

30

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
ACTIVITY MODIFICATION AND EXERCISE
RANGE-OF-MOTION EXERCISES FOR CONTUSIONS
Recommended
Range-of-motion exercises are recommended for treating elbow contusions.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies for any of these interventions. Medical management of
contusions is recommended to be directed at maintaining normal elbow function. With
significant contusion-related injury, there is a risk of deep tissue involvement, potentially
leading to scarring and limitation of motion. Accordingly, treatment should include antiinflammatory medications with avoidance of immobilization except as necessitated by other
injuries. Anti-inflammatory medications serve as an analgesic in the doses that are used for
contusions. Early mobilization should also be encouraged to prevent impairment and
disability and can be best accomplished through instruction in the initial clinical visit.
Medical management can be summarized as protection, rest, ice, compression, elevation,
and range-of-motion exercises. Range-of-motion exercises should primarily involve the
elbow, but may also include the shoulder and wrist, particularly if a sling is prescribed. They
are all thought to be helpful, are not invasive, have low adverse effects especially for shortterm use and are low cost and thus are recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality trials evaluating the use of NSAIDs, acetaminophen, ice, compression,
range of motion exercises, and avoidance of immobilization for elbow contusions.
IMMOBILIZATION FOR CONTUSIONS
Not Recommended
Immobilization is not recommended for elbow contusions.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies for any of these interventions. Medical management of
contusions is recommended to be directed at maintaining normal elbow function. With
significant contusion-related injury, there is a risk of deep tissue involvement, potentially
leading to scarring and limitation of motion. Accordingly, treatment should include antiinflammatory medications with avoidance of immobilization except as necessitated by other
injuries. Anti-inflammatory medications serve as an analgesic in the doses that are used for
contusions. Early mobilization should also be encouraged to prevent impairment and
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

31

disability and can be best accomplished through instruction in the initial clinical visit.
Medical management can be summarized as protection, rest, ice, compression, elevation,
and range-of-motion exercises. Range-of-motion exercises should primarily involve the
elbow, but may also include the shoulder and wrist, particularly if a sling is prescribed. They
are all thought to be helpful, are not invasive, have low adverse effects especially for shortterm use and are low cost and thus are recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality trials evaluating the use of NSAIDs, acetaminophen, ice, compression,
range of motion exercises, and avoidance of immobilization for elbow contusions

MEDICATIONS
NSAIDS FOR ELBOW CONTUSIONS
Recommended
NSAIDs are recommended for treating elbow contusions.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies for any of these interventions. Medical management of
contusions is recommended to be directed at maintaining normal elbow function. With
significant contusion-related injury, there is a risk of deep tissue involvement, potentially
leading to scarring and limitation of motion. Accordingly, treatment should include antiinflammatory medications with avoidance of immobilization except as necessitated by other
injuries. Anti-inflammatory medications serve as an analgesic in the doses that are used for
contusions. Early mobilization should also be encouraged to prevent impairment and
disability and can be best accomplished through instruction in the initial clinical visit.
Medical management can be summarized as protection, rest, ice, compression, elevation,
and range-of-motion exercises. Range-of-motion exercises should primarily involve the
elbow, but may also include the shoulder and wrist, particularly if a sling is prescribed. They
are all thought to be helpful, are not invasive, have low adverse effects especially for shortterm use and are low cost and thus are recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality trials evaluating the use of NSAIDs, acetaminophen, ice, compression,
range of motion exercises, and avoidance of immobilization for elbow contusions.
ACETAMINOPHEN FOR ELBOW CONTUSIONS
Recommended
Acetaminophen is recommended for treating elbow contusions.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

32

Rationale
There are no quality studies for any of these interventions. Medical management of
contusions is recommended to be directed at maintaining normal elbow function. With
significant contusion-related injury, there is a risk of deep tissue involvement, potentially
leading to scarring and limitation of motion. Accordingly, treatment should include antiinflammatory medications with avoidance of immobilization except as necessitated by other
injuries. Anti-inflammatory medications serve as an analgesic in the doses that are used for
contusions. Early mobilization should also be encouraged to prevent impairment and
disability and can be best accomplished through instruction in the initial clinical visit.
Medical management can be summarized as protection, rest, ice, compression, elevation,
and range-of-motion exercises. Range-of-motion exercises should primarily involve the
elbow, but may also include the shoulder and wrist, particularly if a sling is prescribed. They
are all thought to be helpful, are not invasive, have low adverse effects especially for shortterm use and are low cost and thus are recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality trials evaluating the use of NSAIDs, acetaminophen, ice, compression,
range of motion exercises, and avoidance of immobilization for elbow contusions.

HOT AND COLD THERAPIES
ICE FOR CONTUSION
Recommended
Ice is recommended for treating elbow contusions.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies for any of these interventions. Medical management of
contusions is recommended to be directed at maintaining normal elbow function. With
significant contusion-related injury, there is a risk of deep tissue involvement, potentially
leading to scarring and limitation of motion. Accordingly, treatment should include antiinflammatory medications with avoidance of immobilization except as necessitated by other
injuries. Anti-inflammatory medications serve as an analgesic in the doses that are used for
contusions. Early mobilization should also be encouraged to prevent impairment and
disability and can be best accomplished through instruction in the initial clinical visit.
Medical management can be summarized as protection, rest, ice, compression, elevation,
and range-of-motion exercises. Range-of-motion exercises should primarily involve the
elbow, but may also include the shoulder and wrist, particularly if a sling is prescribed. They
are all thought to be helpful, are not invasive, have low adverse effects especially for shortterm use and are low cost and thus are recommended.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

33

Evidence
There are no quality trials evaluating the use of NSAIDs, acetaminophen, ice, compression,
range of motion exercises, and avoidance of immobilization for elbow contusions.

REHABILITATION
COMPRESSION FOR CONTUSIONS
Recommended
Compression is recommended for treating elbow contusions.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies for any of these interventions. Medical management of
contusions is recommended to be directed at maintaining normal elbow function. With
significant contusion-related injury, there is a risk of deep tissue involvement, potentially
leading to scarring and limitation of motion. Accordingly, treatment should include antiinflammatory medications with avoidance of immobilization except as necessitated by other
injuries. Anti-inflammatory medications serve as an analgesic in the doses that are used for
contusions. Early mobilization should also be encouraged to prevent impairment and
disability and can be best accomplished through instruction in the initial clinical visit.
Medical management can be summarized as protection, rest, ice, compression, elevation,
and range-of-motion exercises. Range-of-motion exercises should primarily involve the
elbow, but may also include the shoulder and wrist, particularly if a sling is prescribed. They
are all thought to be helpful, are not invasive, have low adverse effects especially for shortterm use and are low cost and thus are recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality trials evaluating the use of NSAIDs, acetaminophen, ice, compression,
range of motion exercises, and avoidance of immobilization for elbow contusions.

ELBOW DISLOCATION
OVERVIEW
Dislocation of the elbow generally occurs as a result of significant, high-force trauma, and
only dislocation of the shoulder is more common clinically (31). The most common
mechanism is falling onto an outstretched hand, resulting in a posterior dislocation (98% of
cases). Severe pain and inability to use the elbow and hand are typical presenting
complaints. Accompanying fractures and vascular and neurological problems are common,
and a combination of fracture and dislocation is called complex or complex instability. (405,
406) Radial head fractures are present approximately 10% of the time (108). A combination of
dislocation, radial head and ulnar coronoid process fractures is called the terrible triad injury
(109-113)
.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

34

Most elbow dislocations occur due to violent or high-speed collisions, falls, or are congenital
due to joint malformation or excessive laxity. The mechanism of injury determines whether
the condition is work-related. X-rays and relocation, which may call for anesthesia, are
required.

RISK AND CAUSATION
WORK RELATEDNESS
Elbow dislocations, fractures, and sprains are consequences of significant trauma. The
mechanism of the trauma determines whether the condition is work-related.

DIAGNOSIS
INITIAL ASSESSMENT
There are no quality studies for evaluation or treatment of dislocated elbows. An evaluation
of the motor, sensory, and vascular system is required to rule-out accompanying injuries.
Medical management of the dislocated elbow should include an x-ray to assure that there is
no fracture. If the elbow remains dislocated, it should be reduced as soon as possible by a
health care professional experienced in joint relocation. Injection of an anesthetic into the
swollen joint space may help. The longer the elbow remains dislocated, the higher the
probability that general anesthesia will be required to successfully reduce the elbow. Postreduction x-rays are necessary, as well as an exam to be sure that the reduction is successful
and that there is no loose body present. A posterior splint is to be applied for 10 days.
Range-of-motion exercises are recommended after immobilization. Range-of-motion
exercises should primarily involve the elbow, but should also include the shoulder (to
prevent frozen shoulder), and the wrist.
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
Dislocations are diagnosed based on a combination of typical inciting event (usually fall or
trauma) combined with deformity and inability to use the arm. Persistent dislocation
involves a complete inability to use the arm and deformity. Those that spontaneously
reduced are usually accompanied by ongoing, though reduced pain and may have
hemarthrosis.

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
X-RAYS FOR ELBOW DISLOCATION
Recommended
X-rays that include at least two to three views are recommended for elbow dislocation to
rule-out fractures. Repeat x-rays after reduction are also recommended.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating x-rays for elbow dislocations. However, x-rays are
used to rule-out fractures which are found approximately 10% of the time. Additionally,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

35

post-reduction x-rays are recommended. Thus, they are recommended to eliminate
concomitant diagnoses of elbow fractures.

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
OVERVIEW
Some patients with dislocations have been treated with NSAIDs and acetaminophen. Some
patients with dislocations have been treated with opioids. Posterior splints and a sling are
used after reduction of a dislocated elbow. Some patients with dislocations have been
treated with anesthetic intraarticular injection(s) either pre-reduction or post-reduction for
pain control.
Some patients require general anesthesia to facilitate reduction of a dislocated elbow.
Surgery may also be required to repair ligaments if there is either sufficient laxity that
recurrent dislocations occur or are otherwise unstable (77).

MEDICATIONS
NSAIDS FOR ELBOW DISLOCATION
Recommended
NSAIDs are recommended for treatment of pain from elbow dislocations.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Most patients with elbow dislocation requiring medication for pain control may be
candidates. Patients at high risk for gastrointestinal bleeding may be better candidates for
treatment with acetaminophen or a COX-2 inhibitor (see Hip and Groin Disorders guideline).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
As needed dosing is often sufficient. Most patients require a few days treatment and then
generally have insufficient pain for further treatment.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, of development of adverse effects.
Rationale
There is no quality evidence for use of NSAIDs for treatment of patients with elbow
dislocation; however, they address pain management. NSAIDs are not invasive, have low
adverse effects, and are low cost. Thus, they are recommended.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

36

There are no quality studies evaluating the use of NSAIDs and acetaminophen for elbow
dislocation.
ACETAMINOPHEN FOR ELBOW DISLOCATION
Recommended
Acetaminophen is recommended for treatment of pain from elbow dislocations.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Most patients with elbow dislocation requiring medication for pain control may be
candidates. Patients at high risk for gastrointestinal bleeding may be better candidates for
treatment with acetaminophen or a COX-2 inhibitor (see Hip and Groin Disorders guideline).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
As needed dosing is often sufficient. Most patients require a few days treatment and then
generally have insufficient pain for further treatment.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, of development of adverse effects.
Rationale
There is no quality evidence for use of NSAIDs for treatment of patients with elbow
dislocation; however, they address pain management. NSAIDs are not invasive, have low
adverse effects, and are low cost. Thus, they are recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of NSAIDs and acetaminophen for elbow
dislocation.
OPIOIDS FOR SELECT PATIENTS WITH ELBOW DISLOCATIONS
Sometimes Recommended
Opioids are recommended for treatment of select patients with pain from elbow
dislocations
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Select patients with severe pain from elbow dislocation with insufficient control from other
means, including acetaminophen and NSAIDs or with contraindications for NSAIDs.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

37

Considerable cautions are recommended concerning opioids and minimum numbers of
doses should be prescribed as duration of treatment for elbow dislocations is usually quite
limited.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
As-needed dosing. Among the few patients requiring opioids, most require at most a few
days treatment and then generally have insufficient pain for further treatment with opioids.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain sufficiently to not require opioids, consumption that does not follow
prescription instructions, adverse effects
Rationale
Most patients do not require opioids. Some patients, particularly with more severe
dislocations may require opioids. There is no quality evidence for use of opioids for
treatment of these patients; however, they address pain management. There are major
concerns regarding adverse effects of opioids including mortality. However, it is presumed
that few doses combined with short-term use provides sufficient margin of safety for these
medications. Opioids are not invasive, are low cost, but have high adverse effect profiles.
They are recommended for limited duration use in select patients with elbow dislocations.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of opioids for elbow dislocation.
ANTIEMETICS
See the ACOEM Antiemetics Guideline.

DEVICES
POSTERIOR ELBOW SPLINT AND SLING FOR DISLOCATED ELBOW
Recommended
Posterior elbow splint and slings are recommended for treatment of dislocated elbows.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Dislocated elbows after reduction.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Posterior splints are usually applied for approximately 10-17 days (Josefsson et al., 1987).
Range-of-motion exercises are recommended after immobilization. (An RCT in a foreign
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

38

language reported early mobilization was superior to plaster immobilization for pure
posterior dislocations (Rafai et al., 1999)).
Rationale
There is one moderate-quality trial that suggests immobilization results in comparable
outcomes to surgery for simple dislocations (Josefsson et al., 1987). A posterior splint has
been used for treatment of these dislocations and is to be applied for approximately 10 to
17 days. Range-of-motion exercises are recommended after immobilization. Splints are not
invasive, have low adverse effects, are low to moderate cost, and are recommended.

INJECTION THERAPIES
ANESTHETIC INTRA-ARTICULAR INJECTIONS FOR PRE- OR POST-REDUCTION PAIN
Recommended
Anesthetic, with or without opioid, intraarticular injection(s) are recommended either prereduction or post-reduction for pain management.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Either pre-reduction to assist with pain control and facilitate reduction or post-reduction for
pain control.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Short- or intermediate-acting injectable anesthetics are recommended. Generally only one
injection is necessary, usually approximately 5 to 10mL. In some cases, a second may be
reasonable.
Rationale
There are no quality trials. Most patients do not require intraarticular anesthetic injections.
Some require these injections to assist with obtaining sufficient pain relief to facilitate
reduction and thus avoid general anesthesia. Some require these injections after reduction
for pain control. Generally, pre-reduction injections utilize more short-term anesthetics and
post-reduction injections utilize longer lasting anesthetics. These injections are invasive,
have modest adverse effects and are moderately costly, but are recommended to facilitate
reduction and/or pain control.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of opioid anesthetic intraarticular injections
for pre- or post-reduction pain.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

39

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
GENERAL ANESTHESIA TO FACILITATE REDUCTION IN SELECT PATIENTS
Sometimes Recommended
General anesthesia is recommended to facilitate reduction in select patients.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Failure to obtain reduction, generally including use of intraarticular anesthetic injection.
Rationale
There are no quality trials addressing the use of general anesthesia to facilitate reduction of
a dislocated elbow. Most patients do not require general anesthesia to obtain sufficient
muscular relaxation for reduction. In cases where reduction is not obtained and
intraarticular injection with anesthetics is insufficient to obtain reduction, general
anesthesia is used. General anesthesia is at least modestly invasive, has adverse effects and
is high cost, however, it is recommended when other measures fail.
SURGERY FOR ELBOW JOINTS THAT RECURRENTLY DISLOCATE OR ARE UNSTABLE AFTER
DISLOCATION
Sometimes Recommended
Surgery is recommended to repair elbow joints that either recurrently dislocate or are
otherwise unstable after dislocation(s).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Recurrent elbow dislocations and/or unstable elbows after dislocation(s).
Rationale
There are no quality trials addressing surgery for dislocated elbow joints. Most patients do
not require surgical repair after elbow dislocation. However, some have unstable joints due
to ligament and/or capsular damage and laxity. Others have recurrent dislocations. Surgical
repair is successful in some to improve or resolve these issues. Surgery is invasive, has
adverse effects, is costly but is recommended for select patients.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

40

REHABILITATION
EDUCATION FOR ELBOW DISORDERS
Recommended
Education is recommended for patients with elbow disorders.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Frequency/Dose/Duration
One or two appointments for educational purposes. Additional appointments may be
needed if education is combined with occupational or physical therapy treatments. Followup educational visit(s) for more severe disorders as part of a progression towards normal
functional use is sometimes helpful.
Rationale
There are no quality studies specifically evaluating efficacy of patient education for utility or
necessity in treatment of elbow disorders. Yet, for many disorders (e.g., relationship
between elbow hyperflexion and ulnar neuropathies, cast management) education appears
essential. Some clinicians accomplish this in the course of extended patient visits, while
others routinely refer patients to an occupational or physical therapist for education.
Regardless of the approach, a few appointments for educational purposes are
recommended for select patients. The number of appointments is dependent on the
diagnosis, severity of the condition, and co-existing conditions. Although education is
usually incorporated as part of the overall treatment plan, an additional 1 or 2
appointments for purely educational purposes may be helpful midway through a treatment
course for the more severely affected patient. In addition, education is low cost and this is
recommended.
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC ELBOW
MSDS
Recommended
Return-to-work programs are recommended for treatment of subacute or chronic elbow
MSDs, particularly patients with significant lost time.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

41

potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SEVERE ELBOW MSDS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against return-to-work programs for acute, severe elbow
MSDs.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis (see Low Back Disorders and
Chronic Pain guidelines for additional studies)

PROGNOSIS
Fractures require work limitations to avoid use of the fractured arm. Functional restrictions
of the affected extremity are limited by an immobilization technique. Activities should be
modified to allow for splinting and immobilization of the forearm. Return to work will likely
be influenced by the patient and clinician's subjective assessment of disability and
perception of job difficulty. It may be helpful to refer the patient to an occupational
therapist to address the appropriate activity modification, compensatory strategies,
adaptive equipment, and environmental modification throughout the period of the patient’s
recovery and rehabilitation. The other injuries may or may not require work limitations
depending on severity of the injury and the task demands. However, moderate to severe
sprains and dislocations likely necessitate splinting and limitations.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

42

FOLLOW-UP CARE
Patients should be re-evaluated 7 to 10 days after reduction. Range-of-motion exercises
should be progressed at that point. If there is failure to progress, additional testing is
indicated, including for ruling out fracture.
Most patients with a dislocated elbow are treated with a posterior splint after reduction.
They usually are instructed to perform gentle range of motion exercises a few times a day to
prevent prolonged rehabilitation to regain normal range of motion after the splint is
removed. In addition, interventions are provided to address modifications to performance
of ADLs and IADLs.

JOB ANALYSIS
Job analyses may be beneficial to prevent future occurrences of these types of injuries (e.g.,
machine guarding, icy walkways, tool kickback). Some of these, particularly compartment
syndrome and fractures should generally be analyzed for root cause and potential
remediation, as these injuries are generally viewed as critical incident cases.

ELBOW FRACTURE
OVERVIEW
Elbow fractures include both frank and stress fractures. All fractures involve an application
of force that is beyond the bone strength. Occupational fractures most commonly result
from falls and motor vehicle accidents. Non-displaced radial head fractures are usually
treated with slings and have excellent prognoses. Other fractures may require surgical
fixation, casting, and/or cast bracing. Stress fractures are caused by repeated applications of
unaccustomed force over hours to days. Pain is frequently worse at night. These are usually
treated with elimination of the offending exposure and observation.
Elbow fractures most commonly occur from falls. Radial head fractures typically occur from
falls onto an outstretched hand. If the fracture is large and displaced or comminuted (Type
III) or there is a large fracture with a displaced fragment (Type II), surgical referral is
indicated. Capitellar fractures are rare (114,115,116,117,118,119) and usually occur from falling on
an outstretched hand. Non-operative management is sometimes attempted, however most
are believed to require surgical fixation (117). Surgical repairs are often performed for these
fractures (120-128).

RISK AND CAUSATION
WORK RELATEDNESS
Elbow dislocations, fractures, and sprains are consequences of significant trauma. The
mechanism of the trauma determines whether the condition is work-related.

DIAGNOSIS
A clinical impression is made upon history of appropriate injury mechanism and physical
examination findings of substantial tenderness particularly focally over a bone. Findings of
(in)ability to use the elbow should be sought, as well as inspection for signs of deformity.
The elbow extension test (whether the elbow can be fully extended) has been reported to
be 96. 8% sensitive and 48. 5% specific for detection of an elbow fracture in a series of 1,740
patients with an acute elbow injury (129). The negative predictive value was 98. 4%. A
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

43

fracture identified on x-rays, generally 2 to 3 views, confirms that diagnostic impression. The
differential diagnosis prominently includes elbow sprain and dislocation. If x-rays are
negative and clinical suspicion high, a CT is usually the next test.

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
X-RAYS
X-RAYS FOR ELBOW FRACTURE
Recommended
X-rays that include at least two to three views are recommended to diagnose elbow
fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating x-rays for elbow fractures. However, x-rays have
been used for decades to identify those fractures requiring surgical treatment, and evaluate
for healing; thus, they are recommended to diagnose elbow fractures.

ULTRASOUND
DIAGNOSTIC ULTRASOUND FOR FRACTURES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of diagnostic ultrasound for the
evaluation and diagnosis of fratures.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
Ultrasound has been found to be helpful evaluating tendinopathies, including tendon
ruptures. There is no clear indication for use of ultrasound for evaluation of osteoarthrosis
and other disorders. Ultrasound is not invasive, has no adverse effects and is moderately
costly. It is recommended for disorders with soft tissue pathology.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of diagnostic ultrasound.

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
OVERVIEW
Displaced fractures and fracture fragments are believed to require surgical treatment with
fixation, but there are no quality studies of displaced fractures. Widely displaced fracture
and/or comminuted fragments may require radial head excision and/or radial head implant.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

44

Indications to surgically fix elbow fractures are not well defined, and there is a suggestion
that some patients are better candidates than others (e.g., widely displaced fragments, or
requirement for earlier recovery such as in professional athletes, terrible triad patients)
(108,109)
. Until sufficient quality evidence becomes available, the decision to surgically treat
elbow fractures is a decision between the orthopedist and patient.
Casting has been long used to treat elbow and other fractures. Non-displaced radial head
fractures have been treated with slings. Some patients with fractures have been treated
with opioids for pain.

MEDICATIONS
NSAIDS FOR TREATMENT OF ELBOW FRACTURES
Recommended
NSAIDs are recommended to control pain associated with elbow fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Pain due to fracture.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Scheduled dosage rather than as needed is generally preferable.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, lack of efficacy, or development of adverse effects particularly
gastrointestinal.
Rationale
There is no quality evidence for or against the use of NSAIDs or acetaminophen. These
medications have been found useful in other musculoskeletal injuries and by inference may
be efficacious for control of swelling and pain in the initial stages of injury, although some
concerns about healing of bones have been raised. Other studies have suggested no delayed
bone healing (see Distal Forearm Fractures in Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders
guideline).
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of NSAIDs and acetaminophen for elbow
fracture.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

45

ACETAMINOPHEN FOR TREATMENT OF ELBOW FRACTURES
Recommended
Acetaminophen is recommended to control pain associated with elbow fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Pain due to fracture.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Scheduled dosage rather than as needed is generally preferable.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, lack of efficacy, or development of adverse effects particularly
gastrointestinal.
Rationale
There is no quality evidence for or against the use of NSAIDs or acetaminophen. These
medications have been found useful in other musculoskeletal injuries and by inference may
be efficacious for control of swelling and pain in the initial stages of injury, although some
concerns about healing of bones have been raised. Other studies have suggested no delayed
bone healing (see Distal Forearm Fractures in Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders
guideline).
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of NSAIDs and acetaminophen for elbow
fracture.
OPIOIDS FOR SELECT PATIENTS WITH PAIN FROM ELBOW FRACTURES
Sometimes Recommended
Opioids are recommended for treatment of select patients with pain from elbow fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Select patients with severe pain from elbow fracture with insufficient control from other
means, including acetaminophen and NSAIDs or with contraindications for NSAIDs. Patients
with more severe fractures or in the immediate post-operative period may require opioids
for pain management. Considerable cautions are recommended concerning opioids and
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

46

minimum numbers of doses should be prescribed as duration of treatment for elbow
fractures is usually limited.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
As needed. For the few patients requiring opioids, the majority need at most a few days
treatment and then generally have insufficient pain for further treatment with opioids.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain sufficiently to not require opioids, consumption that does not follow
prescription instructions, adverse effects.
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating the use of opioids to control pain from elbow
fractures. Most patients do not require opioids. Some patients, particularly with more
severe fractures may require opioids briefly during the post-operative period after fixation.
There is no quality evidence supporting the use of opioids for treating these patients, but
they address pain management. There are major concerns regarding adverse effects of
opioids including mortality. However, it is presumed that few doses combined with shortterm use provides sufficient margin of safety for these medications. Opioids are not
invasive, are low cost, but have high adverse effect profiles. They are recommended for
limited-duration use in select patients with elbow fractures.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of opioids for patients with pain from elbow
fractures.
ANTIEMETICS
See the ACOEM Antiemetics Guideline.

DEVICES
ELBOW SLINGS FOR NON-DISPLACED AND OCCULT RADIAL HEAD FRACTURES
Recommended
Elbow slings are recommended for treatment of non-displaced and occult radial head
fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Non-displaced radial head fractures and occult fractures. Occult fractures are not visible on
x-rays but are suspected by including either the lack of full extension of the elbow or
evidence of effusion on x-ray.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

47

Frequency/Dose/Duration
Sling (or splint) use for non-displaced radial head fractures is for 7 days. (A shorter complete
immobilization period of as little as 3 days may be used for non-displaced fractures that are
clinically present but not visible on an x-ray.) After 7 days, gentle range-of-motion exercises
within pain tolerance should begin (Snider, 1997), followed by progressive mobilization.
(One low-quality trial suggested superior results with immediate mobilization of nondisplaced radial head fractures (Liow et al., 2002)).
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating splints or slings to treat radial head fractures. These
fractures have excellent prognoses with short-term sling or splint use. Longer term sling or
splint use may be necessary particularly where there is potential for high force use or
exposure. Range-of-motion exercises should primarily involve the elbow, but should also
include the shoulder (to prevent frozen shoulder), and the wrist. Limited mobility may be
achieved with a sling, cast, or posterior elbow splint wrapped over the joint with a tensor at
90° flexion. A thermoplastic splint with Velcro straps may also be used. As pain diminishes,
the unresisted active movement should be increased to pain tolerance to prevent or
minimize contracture. Quality studies are not available on these treatment options and
there is no evidence of their benefits. However, these options are low cost, have few
adverse effects, and are not invasive. Thus, while there is insufficient evidence as to the
benefits of these options, they are recommended.
CASTS FOR SELECT ELBOW FRACTURES
Recommended
Casts and cast bracing are recommended for treatment of non-displaced or occult radial
head fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Minimally displaced fractures and other elbow fractures felt amenable to casting, cast
bracing, or post-open reduction internal fixation fractures.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Casts are generally required for 6 weeks or until adequate healing is documented on x-ray.
After successful healing, they should be followed by progressive mobilization.
Rationale
There are no quality trials regarding the use of casts or cast bracing to treat non-displaced
or occult radial head fractures of the elbow. Many of these fractures require surgical
fixation. Post-operatively they are usually casted. Select elbow fractures may be amenable

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

48

to casting, rather than surgical fixation. Casting is moderately costly, has some adverse
effects, and is not invasive. While there is insufficient evidence of success compared with
other treatments, they are recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of immobilization for elbow fractures. There
is 1 low-quality RCT in Appendix 1.

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
SURGICAL FIXATION OF DISPLACED ELBOW FRACTURES
Recommended
Surgical fixation is recommended for displaced elbow fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality trials of fixation compared with casting or other treatment. Many of
these fractures do not appear to do well without surgery, thus fixation is currently used for
many of these fractures. There is one moderate quality trial comparing two types of fixation
that suggested comparable results (Helling et al., 2006). Widely displaced fracture and/or
comminuted fragments may require radial head excision and/or radial head implant. Some
are treated with arthroplasty. Surgical fixation is invasive, has adverse effects and is costly,
however benefits appear to outweigh risks and fixation is recommended for many of these
patients.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis.

REHABILITATION
EDUCATION AFTER CAST REMOVAL FOR ELBOW FRACTURE
Recommended
Education is recommended for select patients needing education after cast removal for
elbow fracture.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
PHYSICAL OR OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY OF PATIENTS AFTER CAST REMOVAL
Recommended
Physical or occupational therapy is recommended for select patients after cast removal for
elbow fracture.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

49

Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating physical or occupational therapy for rehabilitation of
patients with elbow fractures. These therapies are generally unnecessary for many workingage patients. However, some patients may need formal therapy with exercises if there are
considerable impairments or a failure to progress after removal of the cast or splint. A few
appointments for educational purposes for select patients are recommended. The numbers
of appointments are dependent on the degree of debility, with one or two educational
appointments appropriate for mildly affected patients. Patients with severe debility or those
unable to return to work may necessitate 8 to 12 appointments that particularly include
progressive strengthening exercises. Additionally, while routine use may be of limited
benefit, those patients who have muscle weakness or other debilities may also derive
benefit from therapy including self-training exercises, particularly if unable to return to
work. Therefore, occupational or physical therapy is recommended for select patients.
ROUTINE REFERRAL AFTER CAST REMOVAL
Not Recommended
Routine referral for physical or occupational therapy after cast removal for elbow fracture of
otherwise healthy patients who are able to return to work is not recommended.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating physical or occupational therapy for rehabilitation of
patients with elbow fractures. These therapies are generally unnecessary for many workingage patients. However, some patients may need formal therapy with exercises if there are
considerable impairments or a failure to progress after removal of the cast or splint. A few
appointments for educational purposes for select patients are recommended. The numbers
of appointments are dependent on the degree of debility, with one or two educational
appointments appropriate for mildly affected patients. Patients with severe debility or those
unable to return to work may necessitate 8 to 12 appointments that particularly include
progressive strengthening exercises. Additionally, while routine use may be of limited
benefit, those patients who have muscle weakness or other debilities may also derive
benefit from therapy including self-training exercises, particularly if unable to return to
work. Therefore, occupational or physical therapy is recommended for select patients.

PROGNOSIS
Fractures require work limitations to avoid use of the fractured arm. Functional restrictions
of the affected extremity are limited by an immobilization technique. Activities should be
modified to allow for splinting and immobilization of the forearm. Return to work will likely
be influenced by the patient and clinician's subjective assessment of disability and
perception of job difficulty. It may be helpful to refer the patient to an occupational

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

50

therapist to address the appropriate activity modification, compensatory strategies,
adaptive equipment, and environmental modification throughout the period of the patient’s
recovery and rehabilitation. The other injuries may or may not require work limitations
depending on severity of the injury and the task demands. However, moderate to severe
sprains and dislocations likely necessitate splinting and limitations.

JOB ANALYSIS
Job analyses may be beneficial to prevent future occurrences of these types of injuries (e.g.,
machine guarding, icy walkways, tool kickback). Some of these, particularly compartment
syndrome and fractures should generally be analyzed for root cause and potential
remediation, as these injuries are generally viewed as critical incident cases.

ELBOW OSTEOARTHROSIS
OVERVIEW
Elbow degenerative joint disease (DJD) is most commonly caused by osteoarthrosis (OA) and
is relatively uncommon. While osteoarthritis is the more common name for this entity,
osteoarthrosis is more technically precise as there is no classic inflammation. Other types of
arthritic disorders that cause DJD include inflammatory autoimmune disorders (e.g.,
rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, psoriasis) and crystal diseases (e.g.,
gout, pseudogout, apatites). As these latter disorders are non-occupational, they are not
included in this discussion. The x-ray appearance in each disorder may be indistinguishable,
although at times there are radiologic characteristics that may suggest a specific diagnosis.
Thus, a technically correct interpretation of an x-ray may include DJD, but not OA. There is a
predisposition for patients who already have OA in one or two joints to develop OA in other
joint groups. Several genetic factors have been identified (130). Occupational factors related
to elbow arthrosis are poorly understood and quality occupational epidemiological studies
are lacking. Unilateral cases arising in a joint that sustained a prior fracture is often
considered to be work-related. OA is generally treated with acetaminophen, NSAIDs, topical
NSAIDs, heat, ice, counterirritants (e.g., capsaicin), education, avoidance of aggravating
activities, exercises, injections (glucocorticosteroid and viscosupplementation), and surgical
joint replacement.

RISK AND CAUSATION
WORK RELATEDNESS
Elbow osteoarthrosis is not well investigated epidemiologically. By analogy to other joints, it
would be expected that age (131-136), obesity (137), bone mineral density (138), rheumatoid
arthritis, gout, other inflammatory arthropathies, reduced 25-hydroxyvitamin D (136),
heredity (133), Heberden’s nodes (132-134,139,140), and osteoarthrosis involving other joints in the
body (“systemic or generalized osteoarthrosis”) (130,132,139-142) are risks. Unilateral elbow
osteoarthrosis as a consequence of a prior, discrete occupational traumatic event (e.g.,
humeral or radial head fracture) is considered work-related. There are no quality studies for
other occupational activities. There are some remote reports of elevated odds ratios
associated with vibratory tool use.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

51

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
ULTRASOUND
DIAGNOSTIC ULTRASOUND FOR OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of diagnostic ultrasound for the
evaluation and diagnosis of osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
Ultrasound has been found to be helpful evaluating tendinopathies, including tendon
ruptures. There is no clear indication for use of ultrasound for evaluation of osteoarthrosis
and other disorders. Ultrasound is not invasive, has no adverse effects and is moderately
costly. It is recommended for disorders with soft tissue pathology.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of diagnostic ultrasound.

ARTHROSCOPY
ELBOW ARTHROSCOPY FOR DIAGNOSIS OF OSTEOARTHROSIS
Not Recommended
Arthroscopy is not recommended for diagnosis for patients with acute, subacute, or chronic
osteoarthrosis in the absence of a remediable mechanical defect such as symptomatic loose
body.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies of arthroscopy; however, arthroscopy has been widely used to
diagnose and treat numerous joint abnormalities. Successful treatments have particularly
included meniscal tears, removal of loose bodies, and rotator cuff repairs (see respective
guidelines). By analogy, arthroscopy allows successful diagnosis and treatment of intraarticular elbow pathology. By analogy with the knee joint where quality evidence has
demonstrated a lack of efficacy of chondroplasty (Moseley et al., 2002), chondroplasty of
the elbow joint is not recommended. Arthroplasty is invasive, has some adverse effects and
is costly. However, it is indicated particularly for patients with persistent mechanical elbow
joint symptoms.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

52

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (MRI)
MRI FOR ROUTINE EVALUATION OF ACUTE, SUBACUTE, CHRONIC ELBOW JOINT
PATHOLOGY
Not Recommended
MRI is not recommended for routine evaluation of acute, subacute, or chronic elbow joint
pathology, including degenerative joint disease.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
MRI has not been evaluated in quality studies for elbow pathology. However, it is likely
particularly helpful for soft tissue abnormalities. There are no quality studies evaluating the
use of MRI for AVN, elbow joint pathology, or osteonecrosis. There is low-quality evidence
MRI may be less sensitive for detection of subchondral fractures than helical CT or plain xrays in patients with osteonecrosis (Stevens et al., 2003). MRI is not invasive, has no adverse
effects, aside from issues of claustrophobia or complications of medication, but is costly.
MRI is not recommended for routine elbow imaging, but is recommended for select elbow
joint pathology particularly involving concerns regarding soft tissue pathology.

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
MEDICATIONS
ANTIEMETICS
See the ACOEM Antiemetics Guideline.

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
ELBOW ARTHROSCOPY FOR TREATMENT OF OSTEOARTHROSIS
Not Recommended
Arthroscopy is not recommended for treatment in acute, subacute, or chronic patients with
osteoarthrosis in the absence of a remediable mechanical defect such as symptomatic loose
body.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies of arthroscopy; however, arthroscopy has been widely used to
diagnose and treat numerous joint abnormalities. Successful treatments have particularly
included meniscal tears, removal of loose bodies, and rotator cuff repairs (see respective
guidelines). By analogy, arthroscopy allows successful diagnosis and treatment of intraarticular elbow pathology. By analogy with the knee joint where quality evidence has
demonstrated a lack of efficacy of chondroplasty , chondroplasty of the elbow joint is not
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

53

recommended. Arthroplasty is invasive, has some adverse effects and is costly. However, it
is indicated particularly for patients with persistent mechanical elbow joint symptoms.
ELBOW ARTHROSCOPY WITH CHONDROPLASTY FOR OSTEOARTHROSIS
Not Recommended
Arthroscopy with chondroplasty is not recommended for treatment of osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies of arthroscopy; however, arthroscopy has been widely used to
diagnose and treat numerous joint abnormalities. Successful treatments have particularly
included meniscal tears, removal of loose bodies and rotator cuff repairs (see respective
guidelines). By analogy, arthroscopy allows successful diagnosis and treatment of
intraarticular elbow pathology. By analogy with the knee joint where quality evidence has
demonstrated a lack of efficacy of chondroplasty (Moseley et al., 2002), chondroplasty of
the elbow joint is not recommended. Arthroplasty is invasive, has some adverse effects and
is costly. However, it is indicated particularly in those patients with persistent mechanical
elbow joint symptoms.

REHABILIATION
EDUCATION FOR ELBOW DISORDERS
Recommended
Education is recommended for patients with elbow disorders.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Frequency/Dose/Duration
One or two appointments for educational purposes. Additional appointments may be
needed if education is combined with occupational or physical therapy treatments. Followup educational visit(s) for more severe disorders as part of a progression towards normal
functional use is sometimes helpful.
Rationale
There are no quality studies specifically evaluating efficacy of patient education for utility or
necessity in treatment of elbow disorders. Yet, for many disorders (e.g., relationship
between elbow hyperflexion and ulnar neuropathies, cast management) education appears
essential. Some clinicians accomplish this in the course of extended patient visits, while
others routinely refer patients to an occupational or physical therapist for education.
Regardless of the approach, a few appointments for educational purposes are
recommended for select patients. The number of appointments is dependent on the
diagnosis, severity of the condition, and co-existing conditions. Although education is
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

54

usually incorporated as part of the overall treatment plan, an additional 1 or 2
appointments for purely educational purposes may be helpful midway through a treatment
course for the more severely affected patient. In addition, education is low cost and this is
recommended.
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SEVERE ELBOW MSDS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against return-to-work programs for acute, severe elbow
MSDs.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis (see Low Back Disorders and
Chronic Pain guidelines for additional studies)
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC ELBOW
MSDS
Recommended
Return-to-work programs are recommended for treatment of subacute or chronic elbow
MSDs, particularly patients with significant lost time.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

55

recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.

PROGNOSIS
Elbow osteoarthrosis generally requires no work limitations. When the disease progresses
to moderate or severe, work limitations may be required due to the impairment and/or
pain.

JOB ANALYSIS
Job analysis is generally not indicated for most cases, although where there is potential to
eliminate a hazard that precipitated an acute event (e.g., icy sidewalk, tripping hazards), it
should be resolved. There have been no quality job analysis tools developed to analyze jobs
for risk of elbow osteoarthrosis.

ELBOW OSTEONECROSIS
OVERVIEW
Osteonecrosis involves impairment of the blood supply to the bone and may evolve to
subsequent degeneration and ultimately collapse of the bone. It is particularly likely to
occur in areas of tenuous blood supply that lacks collateral blood flow – thus most
prominently affecting the femoral and humeral heads. The elbow is rarely affected. The
most prominent occupational risk factor is barotraumas (“the bends”), which may occur
both in diving, as well as working in compressed air environments (e.g., tunneling projects
through unstable sediments requiring compressed air to maintain the workspace).
Significant, discrete trauma is thought to be a risk factor. However, the impact of nontraumatic job physical factors is controversial. Treatment is primarily based on reducing the
implicated risk factor (e.g., alcohol, diabetes). A surgical coring procedure (vascularized and
unvascularized bone grafting and osteotomy) are sometimes utilized. Severe cases may
require arthroplasty.

RISK AND CAUSATION
WORK RELATEDNESS
Osteonecrosis rarely affects the elbow (see Hip and Groin Disorders guideline for discussion
of risks).

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
ULTRASOUND
DIAGNOSTIC ULTRASOUND FOR OSTEONECROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of diagnostic ultrasound for the
evaluation and diagnosis of osteonecrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

56

Rationale
Ultrasound has been found to be helpful evaluating tendinopathies, including tendon
ruptures. There is no clear indication for use of ultrasound for evaluation of osteoarthrosis
and other disorders. Ultrasound is not invasive, has no adverse effects and is moderately
costly. It is recommended for disorders with soft tissue pathology.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of diagnostic ultrasound.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (MRI)
MRI FOR DIAGNOSING OSTEONECROSIS (AVN)
Recommended
MRI is recommended for diagnosing osteonecrosis and ligamentous elbow injuries.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Patients with subacute or chronic elbow pain thought to be related to osteonecrosis (AVN)
or ligamentous elbow injuries, particularly in whom the diagnosis is unclear or who need
additional diagnostic evaluation and staging.
Rationale
MRI has not been evaluated in quality studies for elbow pathology. However, it is likely
particularly helpful for soft tissue abnormalities. There are no quality studies evaluating the
use of MRI for AVN, elbow joint pathology, or osteonecrosis. There is low-quality evidence
MRI may be less sensitive for detection of subchondral fractures than helical CT or plain xrays in patients with osteonecrosis (Stevens et al., 2003). MRI is not invasive, has no adverse
effects, aside from issues of claustrophobia or complications of medication, but is costly.
MRI is not recommended for routine elbow imaging, but is recommended for select elbow
joint pathology, particularly involving concerns regarding soft tissue pathology.

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (CT)
CT FOR EVALUATING PATIENTS WITH OSTEONECROSIS (AVN)
Recommended
CT is recommended for evaluating patients with osteonecrosis or following traumatic
dislocations or arthroplasty-associated recurrent dislocations, or for patients who need
advanced imaging but have contraindications for MRI.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

57

Indications
Patients with elbow pain from osteonecrosis with suspicion of subchondral fracture(s),
increased polyosthotic bone metabolism. As MRI is generally preferable, patients should
have a contraindication for MRI. Patients who have traumatic elbow dislocations,
particularly if capitular or trochlear fracture fragments are sought.
Rationale
Computerized tomography is considered superior to MRI for imaging of most elbow
abnormalities where advanced imaging of calcified structures is required. A contrast CT
study is minimally invasive, has few if any, adverse effects but is costly. It is recommended
for select use. Helical CT scan has been thought to be superior to MRI for evaluating
subchondral fractures; however, a definitive study has not been reported (Stevens et al.,
2003).

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
MEDICATIONS
ANTIEMETICS
See the ACOEM Antiemetics Guideline.

REHABILITATION
EDUCATION FOR ELBOW DISORDERS
Recommended
Education is recommended for patients with elbow disorders.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Frequency/Dose/Duration
One or two appointments for educational purposes. Additional appointments may be
needed if education is combined with occupational or physical therapy treatments. Followup educational visit(s) for more severe disorders as part of a progression towards normal
functional use is sometimes helpful.
Rationale
There are no quality studies specifically evaluating efficacy of patient education for utility or
necessity in treatment of elbow disorders. Yet, for many disorders (e.g., relationship
between elbow hyperflexion and ulnar neuropathies, cast management) education appears
essential. Some clinicians accomplish this in the course of extended patient visits, while
others routinely refer patients to an occupational or physical therapist for education.
Regardless of the approach, a few appointments for educational purposes are
recommended for select patients. The number of appointments is dependent on the
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

58

diagnosis, severity of the condition, and co-existing conditions. Although education is
usually incorporated as part of the overall treatment plan, an additional 1 or 2
appointments for purely educational purposes may be helpful midway through a treatment
course for the more severely affected patient. In addition, education is low cost and this is
recommended.
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SEVERE ELBOW MSDS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against return-to-work programs for acute, severe elbow
MSDs.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis (see Low Back Disorders and
Chronic Pain guidelines for additional studies)
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC ELBOW
MSDS
Recommended
Return-to-work programs are recommended for treatment of subacute or chronic elbow
MSDs, particularly patients with significant lost time.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

59

potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.

PROGNOSIS
There is no evidence that work restrictions are helpful, yet as the condition often
progresses, patients typically incur increasing degrees of disability with a progressive need
for work limitations. Advanced cases generally require temporary removal from work and
surgery, with return to work post-operatively. Post-operative limitations are generally based
on a combination of the clinical results (i.e., severity of pain and symptoms) and work
demands. Patients with light to medium work may require no limitations, while those with
medium to heavy work, particularly with post-operative pain, may require significant
limitations.

JOB ANALYSIS
Job analysis is generally not indicated for most cases, although where there are exposures
such as decompression, job analysis to evaluate decompression protocols may be helpful.

ELBOW PAIN
DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
ANTIBODY LEVELS
ANTIBODIES TO CONFIRM SPECIFIC DISORDERS
Recommended
Antibody levels are strongly recommended as a screen to confirm specific disorders (e.g.,
rheumatoid arthritis).
Strength of evidence Strongly Recommended, Evidence (A)
Indications
Patients with elbow pain and a presumptive diagnosis of a rheumatological disorder.
Rationale
Elevated antibody levels are highly useful for confirmation of clinical impressions of
rheumatic diseases. However, routine use of these tests in patients with elbow pain –
especially as wide-ranging, non-focused test batteries – are likely to result in inaccurate
diagnoses due to false positives and low pre-test probabilities and are not recommended.
Clinicians should also be aware that false negative results occur. Measurement of antibody
levels is minimally invasive, unlikely to have substantial adverse effects and is low to
moderately costly depending on the specific test ordered. They are recommended for
focused testing of a limited number of diagnostic considerations.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

60

ANTIBODIES FOR DIAGNOSING ELBOW PAIN WITH SUSPICION OF CHRONIC OR
RECURRENT RHEUMATOLOGICAL DISORDER
Recommended
Antibody levels are recommended to evaluate and diagnose patients with elbow pain who
have reasonable suspicion of rheumatological disorder.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Patients with elbow pain with suspicion of rheumatological disorder.
Rationale
Elevated antibody levels are highly useful for confirmation of clinical impressions of
rheumatic diseases. However, routine use of these tests in patients with elbow pain –
especially as wide-ranging, non-focused test batteries – are likely to result in inaccurate
diagnoses due to false positives and low pre-test probabilities and are not recommended.
Clinicians should also be aware that false negative results occur. Measurement of antibody
levels is minimally invasive, unlikely to have substantial adverse effects and is low to
moderately costly depending on the specific test ordered. They are recommended for
focused testing of a limited number of diagnostic considerations.

ARTHROSCOPY
ELBOW ARTHROSCOPY FOR DIAGNOSING ELBOW PAIN WITH SUSPICION OF
INTRAARTICULAR BODY AND OTHER SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC MECHANICAL SYMPTOMS
Recommended
Arthroscopy is recommended to evaluate and diagnose patients with elbow pain that have
suspicion of intraarticular body, and other subacute or chronic mechanical symptoms.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Patients with elbow pain with suspicion of intraarticular body, or other subacute or chronic
mechanical symptoms.
Rationale
There are no quality studies of arthroscopy; however, arthroscopy has been widely used to
diagnose and treat numerous joint abnormalities. Successful treatments have particularly
included meniscal tears, removal of loose bodies and rotator cuff repairs (see respective
guidelines). By analogy, arthroscopy allows successful diagnosis and treatment of
intraarticular elbow pathology. By analogy with the knee joint where quality evidence has

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

61

demonstrated a lack of efficacy of chondroplasty (Moseley et al., 2002), chondroplasty of
the elbow joint is not recommended. Arthroplasty is invasive, has some adverse effects and
is costly. However, it is indicated particularly in those patients with persistent mechanical
elbow joint symptoms.
ARTHROSCOPY FOR DIAGNOSING ACUTE ELBOW PAIN
Not Recommended
Arthroscopy for diagnosing acute elbow pain is not recommended.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies of arthroscopy; however, arthroscopy has been widely used to
diagnose and treat numerous joint abnormalities. Successful treatments have particularly
included meniscal tears, removal of loose bodies and rotator cuff repairs (see respective
guidelines). By analogy, arthroscopy allows successful diagnosis and treatment of
intraarticular elbow pathology. By analogy with the knee joint where quality evidence has
demonstrated a lack of efficacy of chondroplasty (Moseley et al., 2002), chondroplasty of
the elbow joint is not recommended. Arthroplasty is invasive, has some adverse effects and
is costly. However, it is indicated particularly in those patients with persistent mechanical
elbow joint symptoms.

BONE SCANS
BONE SCANNING FOR SELECT USE IN ACUTE, SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC ELBOW PAIN
Recommended
Bone scanning is recommended for select use in acute, subacute or chronic elbow pain to
assist in the diagnosis of osteonecrosis, neoplasms and other conditions with increased
polyosthotic bone metabolism, particularly where there is more than one joint to be
evaluated.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Patients with elbow pain with suspicion of osteonecrosis, Paget’s disease, neoplasm or
other increased polyosthotic bone metabolism.
Rationale
Bone scanning may be a helpful diagnostic test to evaluate suspected metastases, primary
bone tumors, infected bone (osteomyelitis), inflammatory arthropathies, and trauma (e.g.,
occult fractures). It may be helpful in those with suspected, early AVN but without x-ray
changes. In those where the diagnosis is felt to be secure, there is not an indication for bone
scanning as it does not alter the treatment or management. Bone scanning is minimally
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

62

invasive, has minimal potential for adverse effects (essentially equivalent to a blood test),
but is high cost. It is generally thought to be inferior to MRI.
ROUTINE USE OF BONE SCANNING FOR ROUTINE ELBOW JOINT EVALUATIONS
Not Recommended
Bone scanning is not recommended for routine use in elbow joint evaluations.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
Bone scanning may be a helpful diagnostic test to evaluate suspected metastases, primary
bone tumors, infected bone (osteomyelitis), inflammatory arthropathies, and trauma (e.g.,
occult fractures). It may be helpful in those with suspected, early AVN but without x-ray
changes. In those where the diagnosis is felt to be secure, there is not an indication for bone
scanning as it does not alter the treatment or management. Bone scanning is minimally
invasive, has minimal potential for adverse effects (essentially equivalent to a blood test),
but is high cost. It is generally thought to be inferior to MRI.

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (CT)
ROUTINE CT FOR EVALUATING ACUTE, SUBACUTE, CHRONIC ELBOW PAIN
Not Recommended
Routine CT is not recommended for evaluation of acute, subacute, or chronic elbow pain.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
Computerized tomography is considered superior to MRI for imaging of most elbow
abnormalities where advanced imaging of calcified structures is required. A contrast CT
study is minimally invasive, has few if any, adverse effects but is costly. It is recommended
for select use. Helical CT scan has been thought to be superior to MRI for evaluating
subchondral fractures; however, a definitive study has not been reported (Stevens et al.,
2003).
HELICAL CT FOR SELECT ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ELBOW PAIN
Recommended
Helical CT is recommended for select patients with acute, subacute, or chronic elbow pain in
whom advanced imaging of bony structures is thought to be potentially helpful, and for
patients with a need for advanced imaging but who have contraindications for MRI.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

63

Patients with acute, subacute, or chronic elbow pain who need advanced bony structure
imaging. Patients needing advanced imaging, but with contraindications for MRI (e.g.,
implanted hardware) are also candidates.
Rationale
Computerized tomography is considered superior to MRI for imaging of most elbow
abnormalities where advanced imaging of calcified structures is required. A contrast CT
study is minimally invasive, has few if any, adverse effects but is costly. It is recommended
for select use. Helical CT scan has been thought to be superior to MRI for evaluating
subchondral fractures; however, a definitive study has not been reported (Stevens et al.,
2003).

NONSPECIFIC INFLAMMATORY MARKERS
NON-SPECIFIC INFLAMMATORY MARKERS FOR SCREENING FOR INFLAMMATORY
DISORDERS IN PATIENTS WITH SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC ELBOW PAIN
Recommended
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and other inflammatory markers are recommended for
screening for inflammatory disorders or prosthetic sepsis with reasonable suspicion of
inflammatory disorder in patients with subacute or chronic elbow pain.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Patients with elbow pain with suspicion of rheumatological disorder.
Rationale
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate is the most commonly used systemic marker for non-specific
inflammation and is elevated in numerous inflammatory conditions including
rheumatological disorders, as well as with infectious diseases. C-reactive protein is a marker
of systemic inflammation that has been associated with an increased risk of coronary artery
disease. However, it is also a non-specific marker for other inflammation. Other non-specific
markers of inflammation include ferritin, and an elevated protein-albumin gap, which have
no known clinical roles. CRP and ESR measurements are minimally invasive, have low risk of
adverse effects and are low cost. They are recommended as a reasonable screen for
systemic inflammatory conditions especially if the elbow pain patient also has other pains
without clear definition of a diagnosis or those with fibromyalgia or myofascial pain
syndrome, although the specificity is not high. However, ordering of a large, diverse array
of anti-inflammatory markers without targeting a few specific disorders diagnostically is
not recommended.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

64

There are no quality studies evaluating the use of C-reactive protein, erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, and other non-specific inflammatory markers for elbow pain

SPECT/PET SCANS
SPECT OR PET FOR DIAGNOSING ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ELBOW PAIN
Not Recommended
SPECT and PET are not recommended for diagnosing acute, subacute, or chronic elbow pain.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining x-rays once is generally sufficient. For patients with chronic or progressive elbow
pain, it may be reasonable to obtain a second set of x-rays months to years subsequently to
re-evaluate the patient’s condition, particularly if symptoms change.
Rationale
SPECT or PET scanning of the brain may be useful to assess the status of cerebrovascular
perfusion, tumors, and neurodegenerative conditions, but aside from providing information
for research, these scans have not been shown to be useful in influencing the management
of patients with chronic pain states, including chronic elbow pain. There is no quality
evidence to support the use of these scans to evaluate patients with elbow pain. PET
scanning is expensive and SPECT scanning moderately so. Both are minimally invasive.
SPECT scanning may be useful in detecting inflammatory disease in the spine or other areas
that might not be amenable to evaluation by other studies.
Evidence
There are no quality studies of SPECT or PET relevant to their use in the management of
elbow pain.

X-RAYS
X-RAYS FOR EVALUATION OF ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ELBOW PAIN
Recommended
X-rays are recommended for evaluation of acute, subacute, or chronic elbow pain.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
In the absence of red flags, patients with elbow pain lasting at least a few weeks, moderate
to severe, and/or limited range of motion, or to evaluate for osteomyelitis in cases of
significant septic olecranon bursitis.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

65

Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining x-rays once is generally sufficient. For patients with chronic or progressive elbow
pain, it may be reasonable to obtain a second set of x-rays months to years subsequently to
re-evaluate the patient’s condition, particularly if symptoms change.
Rationale
X-rays are helpful to evaluate most patients with elbow pain, both to diagnose and to assist
with the differential diagnostic possibilities. There are no quality studies. X-rays are noninvasive, low to moderate cost, and have little risk of adverse effects and therefore, are
recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of x-rays for elbow pain.

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
MEDICATIONS
ACETAMINOPHEN FOR TREATMENT OF ELBOW PAIN
Recommended
Acetaminophen is recommended for treatment of elbow pain, particularly in patients with
contraindications for NSAIDs.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
All patients with elbow pain, including acute, subacute, chronic, and post-operative.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Per manufacturer’s recommendations; may be utilized on an as-needed basis. It has been
suggested that 1gm doses are more effective than 650mg doses particularly in postoperative patients (McQuay et al., 2002); however, this level is now above the maximum
dose recommended by an FDA advisory committee of 650mg and evidence of hepatic
toxicity has been reported at 4 gm/day in a few days particularly among those consuming
excessive alcohol. There is no quality evidence for superiority of 1gm dosing for treatment
of osteoarthrosis (Medical Letter, 2009).
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, adverse effects or intolerance.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

66

REHABILITATION
EDUCATION FOR ELBOW DISORDERS
Recommended
Education is recommended for patients with elbow disorders.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Frequency/Dose/Duration
One or two appointments for educational purposes. Additional appointments may be
needed if education is combined with occupational or physical therapy treatments. Followup educational visit(s) for more severe disorders as part of a progression towards normal
functional use is sometimes helpful.
Rationale
There are no quality studies specifically evaluating efficacy of patient education for utility or
necessity in treatment of elbow disorders. Yet, for many disorders (e.g., relationship
between elbow hyperflexion and ulnar neuropathies, cast management) education appears
essential. Some clinicians accomplish this in the course of extended patient visits, while
others routinely refer patients to an occupational or physical therapist for education.
Regardless of the approach, a few appointments for educational purposes are
recommended for select patients. The number of appointments is dependent on the
diagnosis, severity of the condition, and co-existing conditions. Although education is
usually incorporated as part of the overall treatment plan, an additional 1 or 2
appointments for purely educational purposes may be helpful midway through a treatment
course for the more severely affected patient. In addition, education is low cost and this is
recommended.
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SEVERE ELBOW MSDS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against return-to-work programs for acute, severe elbow
MSDs.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

67

recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis (see Low Back Disorders and
Chronic Pain guidelines for additional studies)
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC ELBOW
MSDS
Recommended
Return-to-work programs are recommended for treatment of subacute or chronic elbow
MSDs, particularly patients with significant lost time.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.

PROGNOSIS
Job limitations are generally thought to be not necessary for most cases of non-specific pain
as they tend to be self-limited. However, in cases where symptoms persist and/or in settings
with combined high force and high repetition, workplace limitations may be tried to assess if
there is a significant impact of job physical factors.

JOB ANALYSIS
Job analysis is difficult for many of these conditions, particularly as the discrete entity to be
evaluated and job analysis methods are unclear. However, job analyses may also be
revealing particularly when there is a high exposure situation (i.e., high force or
combinations of high force and other ergonomic risk factors). This may be especially
indicated where other cases of MSDs are present in the workforce and may help with the
treatment plan.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

68

ELBOW SPRAIN
OVERVIEW
An isolated elbow sprain is relatively uncommon and is caused by a significant high-force
trauma, resulting in a disruption of ligament(s) about the elbow. The most common
mechanism is a fall. Generally, a sprain is accompanied by other problems such as fracture,
dislocation, or contusion. These potential complications need to be evaluated including the
motor, sensory, and vascular systems. For the medical management of dislocation of the
elbow, an x-ray should be taken to assure that there is no fracture.

RISK AND CAUSATION
WORK RELATEDNESS
Elbow dislocations, fractures, and sprains are consequences of significant trauma. The
mechanism of the trauma determines whether the condition is work-related.

DIAGNOSIS
INITIAL ASSESSMENT
There are no quality studies for evaluation or treatment of elbow sprains. An evaluation of
the motor, sensory, and vascular system is required to rule-out accompanying injury(ies).
Other than mild sprains, medical management of the sprained elbow should generally
include an x-ray to assure that there is no fracture.
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
Sprains are diagnosed based on a combination of typical inciting event (usually fall or highforce trauma) combined with characteristic elbow pain and focal tenderness over
ligament(s). In contrast with dislocations and fractures, sprains generally have normal,
though painful range of motion.

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
X-RAYS FOR ELBOW SPRAIN
Recommended
X-rays that include at least two to three views are recommended to rule-out fractures.
Repeat x-rays are also recommended if there is failure to improve as clinically expected over
approximately a week.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating x-rays for elbow sprains. However, x-rays are used to
rule-out fractures which are found in a minority of patients. Thus, they are recommended to
eliminate concomitant diagnoses of elbow fractures.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

69

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
MEDICATIONS
NSAIDS FOR ELBOW SPRAINS
Recommended
NSAIDs are recommended for the treatment of pain from elbow sprains.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Most patients with elbow sprain requiring medication for pain control may be candidates.
Patients at high risk for gastrointestinal bleeding may be better candidates for treatment
with acetaminophen or a COX-2 inhibitor (see Hip and Groin Disorders guideline).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
As-needed dosing is often sufficient. Most patients require a short course of treatment and
then generally have insufficient pain for further treatment.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, of development of adverse effects.
Rationale
There is no quality evidence for use of NSAIDs for treatment of patients with elbow sprains;
however, they address pain management. NSAIDs are not invasive, have low adverse
effects, are low cost and are thus recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of NSAIDs and acetaminophen for patients
with elbow sprains.
ACETAMINOPHEN FOR ELBOW SPRAINS
Recommended
Acetaminophen is recommended for the treatment of pain from elbow sprains.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

70

Most patients with elbow sprain requiring medication for pain control may be candidates.
Patients at high risk for gastrointestinal bleeding may be better candidates for treatment
with acetaminophen or a COX-2 inhibitor (see Hip and Groin Disorders guideline).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
As-needed dosing is often sufficient. Most patients require a short course of treatment and
then generally have insufficient pain for further treatment.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, of development of adverse effects.
Rationale
There is no quality evidence for use of NSAIDs for treatment of patients with elbow sprains;
however, they address pain management. NSAIDs are not invasive, have low adverse
effects, are low cost and are thus recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of NSAIDs and acetaminophen for patients
with elbow sprains.
OPIOIDS FOR SELECT PATIENTS WITH ELBOW SPRAINS
Sometimes Recommended
Opioids are recommended for the treatment of select patients with pain from severe elbow
sprains.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Select patients with severe pain from severe elbow sprains with insufficient control from
other means, including acetaminophen and NSAIDs or with contraindications for NSAIDs.
Considerable cautions are recommended concerning opioids and minimum numbers of
doses should be prescribed as duration of treatment for elbow sprains is usually limited.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
As-needed dosing. Among the few patients requiring opioids, most require at most a few
days treatment and then generally have insufficient pain for further treatment with opioids.
Indications for discontinuation

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

71

Resolution of pain sufficiently to not require opioids, consumption that does not follow
prescription instructions, adverse effects.
Rationale
Most patients do not require opioids. Some patients, particularly with more severe sprains
may require opioids. There is no quality evidence for use of opioids for treatment of these
patients, however they address pain management. There are major concerns regarding
adverse effects of opioids including mortality. However, it is presumed that few doses
combined with short term use provides sufficient margin of safety for these medications.
Opioids are not invasive, are low cost, but have high adverse effect profiles. They are
recommended for limited duration use in select patients with elbow sprains.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of opioids for patients with elbow sprains.

DEVICES
SLINGS FOR ELBOW SPRAINS
Recommended
Slings are recommended for the treatment of elbow sprains.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally should be used for less than 7 to 10 days with gradual reduction in use. Range of
motion exercises of the elbow and shoulder are recommended several times daily while
using a sling to prevent after complications from reduced ranges of motion.
Rationale
There are no quality trials. Slings have been used to treat elbow sprains. Prolonged sling use
is believed to result in reduced ranges of motion and other complications such as adhesive
capsulitis. Range-of-motion exercises are recommended while using a sling for a sprain.
Slings are not invasive, have low adverse effects, are low to moderate cost, and are
recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of slings for elbow sprains.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

72

REHABILITATION
EDUCATION FOR ELBOW DISORDERS
Recommended
Education is recommended for patients with elbow disorders.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Frequency/Dose/Duration
One or two appointments for educational purposes. Additional appointments may be
needed if education is combined with occupational or physical therapy treatments. Followup educational visit(s) for more severe disorders as part of a progression towards normal
functional use is sometimes helpful.
Rationale
There are no quality studies specifically evaluating efficacy of patient education for utility or
necessity in treatment of elbow disorders. Yet, for many disorders (e.g., relationship
between elbow hyperflexion and ulnar neuropathies, cast management) education appears
essential. Some clinicians accomplish this in the course of extended patient visits, while
others routinely refer patients to an occupational or physical therapist for education.
Regardless of the approach, a few appointments for educational purposes are
recommended for select patients. The number of appointments is dependent on the
diagnosis, severity of the condition, and co-existing conditions. Although education is
usually incorporated as part of the overall treatment plan, an additional 1 or 2
appointments for purely educational purposes may be helpful midway through a treatment
course for the more severely affected patient. In addition, education is low cost and this is
recommended.
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SEVERE ELBOW MSDS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against return-to-work programs for acute, severe elbow
MSDs.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

73

recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis (see Low Back Disorders and
Chronic Pain guidelines for additional studies)
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC ELBOW
MSDS
Recommended
Return-to-work programs are recommended for treatment of subacute or chronic elbow
MSDs, particularly patients with significant lost time.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.

PROGNOSIS
Fractures require work limitations to avoid use of the fractured arm. Functional restrictions
of the affected extremity are limited by an immobilization technique. Activities should be
modified to allow for splinting and immobilization of the forearm. Return to work will likely
be influenced by the patient and clinician's subjective assessment of disability and
perception of job difficulty. It may be helpful to refer the patient to an occupational
therapist to address the appropriate activity modification, compensatory strategies,
adaptive equipment, and environmental modification throughout the period of the patient’s
recovery and rehabilitation. The other injuries may or may not require work limitations
depending on severity of the injury and the task demands. However, moderate to severe
sprains and dislocations likely necessitate splinting and limitations.

FOLLOW-UP CARE
Patients should be re-evaluated 7 to 10 days after initial evaluation to assure there is
progress. If there is a lack of progress, x-ray and re-evaluation is required.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

74

Patients are usually instructed to perform gentle range-of-motion exercises a few times a
day in order to maintain normal range of motion. In addition, interventions are provided to
address modifications to performance of ADLs and IADLs.

JOB ANALYSIS
Job analyses may be beneficial to prevent future occurrences of these types of injuries (e.g.,
machine guarding, icy walkways, tool kickback). Some of these, particularly compartment
syndrome and fractures should generally be analyzed for root cause and potential
remediation, as these injuries are generally viewed as critical incident cases.

LATERAL AND MEDIAL EPICONDYLALGIA
OVERVIEW
Epicondylalgia is a painful disorder of either the lateral elbow (lateral epicondylitis or tennis
elbow) or medial elbow (medial epicondylitis or golfer’s elbow), that most commonly has a
gradual onset. But the pain may also occur acutely, such as from striking the elbow on a
hard object. Underlying chronic degenerative conditions have been widely described in
pathological studies (5,143,144). Treatment most commonly involves NSAIDs, ice or heat, and
glucocorticosteroid injections. Physical or occupational therapy including exercises is often
prescribed. Surgical release is performed in cases that respond insufficiently to other
treatments.
Lateral epicondylalgia (lateral epicondylitis) causes soreness, or pain on the outside (lateral)
side of the upper arm near the elbow. There may be a partial tear of the tendon fibers,
which connect muscle to bone, at or near their point of origin on the outside of the elbow.
However, the mechanism of injury and pathogenesis is controversial and conflicting with
considerable evidence of underlying chronic degenerative conditions (5,6,7). Medial
epicondylitis is substantially less common, but is theorized to be analogous to lateral
epicondylalgia but affected the muscle-tendon units originating at the medial elbow. As
there is almost no quality literature on medial epicondylalgia (see evidence table for the few
studies), treatment of that condition is by analogy to lateral epicondylalgia and should be
considered “Insufficient Evidence” recommendations.
Medial epicondylalgia is much less common than lateral epicondylalgia, which is thought to
be about seven times more common (99). Medial epicondylalgia is sometimes thought to
occur concomitantly with ulnar neuropathy at the elbow (see Ulnar Nerve Entrapment).
While the evidence is somewhat unclear if treatment of medial epicondylalgia by analogy to
lateral epicondylalgia is appropriate, it is assumed by the medical community that this is
correct. The few quality trials of medial epicondylalgia also appear to suggest comparable
results for the same treatments with lateral epicondylalgia (99,144-147). Thus, recommended
treatment of medial epicondylalgia is inferred from treatment of lateral epicondylalgia.

RISK AND CAUSATION
Lateral epicondylalgia is widely considered to have a relationship with job physical factors
(21,22)
; however, most epidemiological studies are cross sectional and/or lack quantification
of job physical factors (20,148-156). There are no robust prospective cohort studies with
measured job physical factors, detailed standardized physical examinations and frequent
follow-up of workers that have been reported to establish causal job physical factors. In
addition, there are few epidemiological studies demonstrating moderate or strong
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

75

associations. This results in a limited evidence base for purposes of either prevention or
determination of work-relatedness. It is currently assumed the risks will be demonstrated to
be strongest in jobs that combine high force with high repetition, particularly with high
duration of exertion. Nevertheless, that relationship(s) currently remain(s) unestablished.
Some cases occur after discrete traumatic events (most commonly, bumping an elbow
against equipment or machinery) and are considered work-related. Unaccustomed use is
also thought to be a risk, but is not well demonstrated. Psychosocial factors have been
reported as significant in a few trials with evidence of low social support at work associated
with lateral epicondylitis (150). A recent clinical trial reported the most important factors
determining disability were depression and ineffective coping skills (157).
Medial epicondylalgia is theorized to be analogous to lateral epicondylalgia. However, this
theory is unclear. There are no quality studies of medial epicondylalgia (20,151,154,158). By
analogy, stereotypical, forceful use is believed to be a risk.

DIAGNOSIS
INITIAL ASSESSMENT
Most patients require no special testing provided red flags are absent. For patients who
have been treated for at least 4 weeks and symptoms have failed to improve, additional
testing may be required. Some patients require testing to eliminate alternate diagnostic
possibilities such as C-6 cervical radiculopathy (typically with MRI), fibromyalgia (requires a
careful history and physical examination) or arthrosis (x-ray of the elbow). EMG may be
used for cervical radiculopathy, but is recommended at least 6 weeks after symptom onset
to allow sufficient time for EMG changes to be manifest (require 3 weeks minimum). While
there are some studies utilizing ultrasound and MRI, there is no quality evidence that those
tests alter the treatment plan and effect superior outcomes.
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
Lateral epicondylalgia is diagnosed based on a combination of lateral elbow pain plus
tenderness to palpation over the lateral epicondyle or tenderness within a couple
centimeters distal to the epicondyle. Whether a resisted maneuver, such as resisted wrist or
resisted middle finger extension, should be required appears questionable, as it appears to
considerably reduce sensitivity with the numbers of cases decreased by approximately 50%
(37)
. Patients should not have other potential explanatory conditions such as cervical
radiculopathy (especially C-6), elbow arthrosis or fibromyalgia. Some patients will have
onset after a traumatic event, usually a relatively mild accident such as bumping the elbow
on a hard surface; however this is not required to make a diagnosis.

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
OVERVIEW
In employment settings where milder cases are more frequently seen, nonprescription
analgesics may provide sufficient pain relief for most patients with acute or subacute elbow
symptoms. In clinical settings, cases may be more severe and may require prescription
analgesics as first-line treatments. If treatment response is inadequate, (i.e., symptoms and
activity limitations continue), prescribed pharmaceuticals, orthotics, or physical methods
can be added. Conservative care most often consists of activity modification using
epicondylalgia supports (tennis elbow bands) and NSAIDs.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

76

NSAIDs are widely used for treatment of lateral epicondylalgia (145,159,160,161,162).
Acetaminophen is also widely used for this condition (see Hip and Groin Disorders guideline
for mechanisms of action and classes of these medications).
Topical NSAIDs have been utilized for epicondylalgia, both as a topical application (163-167), as
well as by iontophoresis treatment (see Iontophoresis section below).
Opioids are rarely used for treatment of patients with epicondylalgia. They are more
frequently used briefly in the immediate post-operative period.
There are a variety of physical methods which may be appropriate to use in the treatment
of lateral epicondylalgia. However, as reviewed below, there is evidence of efficacy for
certain methods, no evidence for several others, and evidence of a lack of efficacy for some.
Some clinicians use a variety of procedures; yet conclusions regarding their effectiveness are
not based on high-quality studies. Included among these interventions are epicondylalgia
supports, exercise, heat/cold packs, manipulation, massage, friction massage, soft tissue
mobilization, biofeedback, transcutaneous electrical neurostimulation (TENS), electrical
stimulation (E-STIM), magnets, diathermy, and acupuncture. The clinician should document
objective evidence of functional improvement in order to assist with management of the
disorder as well as to support whether or not to continue current treatment plans. This can
be demonstrated by a combination of clinical improvement in disability questionnaires (e.g.,
DASH or Upper Extremity Function Scale), improvement in pain-free grip strength, or
improvement in lifting ability, or some other functional activity (i.e., evaluate the patient’s
performance of an activity found to be limited at the time of the initial evaluation). Instead
of focusing on a specific number of visits/treatment duration, identifying trends in the
treatment provided are likely to be more helpful:
●
Visit frequency should usually decrease over the episode of care, with the patient
performing exercises more independently and the therapist’s role becoming more
consultative and coaching, assisting in progression of exercise and encouraging the patient.
●
The use of physical agents and manual procedures should be weaned from
supervised treatment either entirely, or limited to home use.
●
It is reasonable to expect that if a particular treatment is going to benefit a particular
patient, beneficial effects should be evident within 2 to 3 visits. Continuing with a treatment
that has not resulted in objective improvement beyond approximately 5 or 6 treatments is
not reasonable. Treatment that has not resulted in improvement after a couple of visits
should either be modified substantially or discontinued.
●
It should be expected that most patients with more severe conditions receive 8 to 12
visits over 6 to 8 weeks as long as functional improvement and program progression are
documented. Patients with mild symptoms may require no therapy appointments or only a
few appointments. Those with moderate problems may require 5 to 6 visits.
Tennis elbow straps and braces have been used for treatment of lateral (and medial)
epicondylalgia (89,168-193). Home exercises and supervised exercise programs are frequently
used for treatment of lateral epicondylalgia, although exercise is often combined with other
treatments (172,180,181,183,194-204). Heat and cryotherapy have been used for treatment of
lateral epicondylalgia (201,205). Iontophoresis with administration of either
glucocorticosteroids or NSAIDs has been used for treatment of lateral epicondylalgia
(144,206,207-210)
.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

77

Ultrasound has been used for the treatment of epicondylalgia (180,197,198,200,211-,219). Soft tissue
mobilization has been administered to patients with lateral epicondylalgia (220,221).
Manipulation has also been utilized for treatment of lateral epicondylalgia (195,222-229)
including manipulation of the cervical spine (230). Massage, particularly friction massage, has
been utilized for treatment of epicondylalgia (172,173,180,194,197,198,224,231,232,233).
Extracorporeal shockwave therapy has been utilized for lateral epicondylalgia (181,234-251).
Phonophoresis has been used for the treatment of lateral epicondylalgia (208,214,231). Lowlevel laser therapy has been used for treatment of lateral epicondylalgia (146,180,212,252-264).
Acupuncture has been used for treatment of lateral epicondylalgia (180,198,252,265-274).
Glucocorticosteroid injections have long been used to treat lateral epicondylalgia (160,161,194198,204,218,222,275-286)
. However, there are concerns that epicondylalgia is not an inflammatory
condition, although the mechanism of action of glucocorticoids may not involve traditional
anti-inflammatory properties. There also are concerns about worse long-term results with
these injections (157,194,195,197,198,204). Botulinum injections have been used for treatment of
lateral epicondylalgia (287-292).
Platelet-rich plasma has been increasingly used to treat lateral epicondylitis as well as other
tendinopathies (293-299). Autologous blood injections have been similarly used (251,299,300,301).
Efficacy is thought to be due to growth factors that are hoped will produce tissue
regeneration including PD-EGF (platelet-derived epidermal growth factor), PDGF-A, PDGF-B
(platelet-derived growth factor), TGF-β1 (transforming growth factor), IGF-I, IGF-II (insulinlike growth factor), VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor), ECGF (endothelial cell growth
factor), and bFGF (basic fibroblast growth factor) (293,296).
Polidocanol injections have been utilized for treatment of lateral epicondylalgia (302,303).
Sodium hyaluronate and glycosaminoglycan periarticular injections have been used for
treatment of chronic lateral epicondylalgia (304,305). Prolotherapy injections have been used
for treatment of lateral epicondylalgia. Sonographically guided percutaneous tenotomy has
also been attempted (306,307). Surgery has been used to treat lateral epicondylalgia that does
not respond to adequate trials of nonoperative care (89,308-320). There are three main surgical
approaches for lateral epicondylalgia – open (308,311,317,321-325), percutaneous (316,326), and
arthroscopic (309,312,325,327-330). One review found no evidence of the superiority of one
approach over another, and concluded that the choice should be left to the individual
surgeon until quality evidence of a superior approach or technique becomes available (312).
Decompression of the posterior interosseous nerve and lengthening of the tendon has also
been reported (308) with a presumptive diagnosis of possible radial nerve entrapment
presenting as “resistant tennis elbow. ” A radiofrequency procedure (microtenotomy) has
also been developed (331).

ACTIVITY MODIFICATION AND EXERCISE
ERGONOMIC INTERVENTIONS FOR EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
In settings with combinations of risk factors (e.g., high force combined with high repetition),
ergonomic interventions are recommended to reduce risk factors for epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

78

Rationale
There are no quality studies of ergonomic interventions for epicondylalgia, although
ergonomics interventions have been attempted in numerous occupational settings
(Verhagen et al., 2006). However, a few RCTs have explored keyboard workstations (Rempel
et al., 1999, Rempel et al., 2006, Tittiranonda et al., 1999, Gerr et al., 2005) (see Hand,
Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline). There also have been quality studies reported
regarding participatory ergonomics programs; however, those are mainly reports of patients
with spine disorders in programs whose purpose is return to work (Arnetz et al., 2003) (see
Low Back Disorders guideline). Despite the lack of quality evidence, reductions in job
physical factors, particularly high force, are thought to be beneficial (Herbert et al., 2000)
(see Work-Relatedness). There also are experimental studies of different equipment
(Simmer-Beck et al., 2006); however, reports of linkage with MSDs are lacking.
There are no quality studies of ergonomic interventions for epicondylalgia or other elbow
MSDs in physically demanding occupations. Interventions which reduce forceful, repeated
pinching or alleviating localized compression by sharp objects may be theoretically helpful
(Vogel et al., 1989, Ploetz, 1938, Hadji-Zavar, 1959, Compere, 1933, Hume et al., 1990,
Hauck, 1923, Sperling, 1951, Zelle et al., 1936, Lapidus et al., 1952, Fahey et al., 1954,
Lipscomb, 1959, Lenggenhager, 1969, Sairanan, 1957, Rayan, 1990, Moore, 2000, Gorsche
et al., 1998). Quality evidence is not available for effectiveness of ergonomic interventions
on MSD injury rates in typical manufacturing settings. However, given available evidence of
risk factors, interventions are recommended where there are combinations of risk factors;
particularly combined high force and high repetition (see Work-Relatedness).
Management/supervisor and labor/employee support are often necessary for optimal
success of these programs. While quality evidence is lacking for the use of ergonomics
training, it is thought to be beneficial in high-risk settings and is recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of ergonomic interventions.
ERGONOMICS TRAINING IN MODERATE- OR HIGH-RISK MANUFACTURING SETTINGS
Recommended
Ergonomics training is recommended in moderate- or high-risk manufacturing settings.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies of ergonomic interventions for epicondylalgia, although
ergonomics interventions have been attempted in numerous occupational settings .
However, a few RCTs have explored keyboard workstations (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm
Disorders guideline). There also have been quality studies reported regarding participatory
ergonomics programs; however, those are mainly reports of patients with spine disorders in
programs whose purpose is return to work (see Low Back Disorders guideline). Despite the

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

79

lack of quality evidence, reductions in job physical factors, particularly high force, are
thought to be beneficial (see Work-Relatedness). There also are experimental studies of
different equipment ; however, reports of linkage with MSDs are lacking. There are no
quality studies of ergonomic interventions for epicondylalgia or other elbow MSDs in
physically demanding occupations. Interventions which reduce forceful, repeated pinching
or alleviating localized compression by sharp objects may be theoretically helpful . Quality
evidence is not available for effectiveness of ergonomic interventions on MSD injury rates in
typical manufacturing settings. However, given available evidence of risk factors,
interventions are recommended where there are combinations of risk factors; particularly
combined high force and high repetition (see Work-Relatedness). Management/supervisor
and labor/employee support are often necessary for optimal success of these programs.
While quality evidence is lacking for the use of ergonomics training, it is thought to be
beneficial in high-risk settings and is recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of ergonomic interventions.
WORK RESTRICTIONS FOR TREATMENT OF EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
For patients with medial or lateral epicondylalgia, it is recommended that their work be
restricted to those tasks that do not involve high-force stereotypical hand gripping or
pinching or the use of high-amplitude vibrating hand-held tools
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Select patients with combined forceful and repeated stereotypical use of the hands.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution, lack of improvement, or desire of the patient to remove limitations.
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating workplace restrictions for treatment of
epicondylalgia. One trial included “rest” as a treatment arm and failed to find efficacy of rest
(Lundeberg et al., 1988). Thus, whether patients improve more quickly with activity
limitations has not been proven. There are trials that have included ergonomic advice as a
co-intervention, although the advice is usually simply avoiding aggravating activities (Smidt
et al., 2002). However, based on available evidence associating combined forceful and
repeated, stereotypical use of the hands with epicondylalgia, work restrictions are
recommended to treat select patients. These types of jobs involve a minority of patients
with epicondylalgia. Restrictions are not invasive, likely have few adverse effects, and may
be moderate to high cost depending on length of time they are in place.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

80

Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis
HOME EXERCISES FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, CHRONIC, OR POSTOPERATIVE
EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
Home exercises are recommended for the treatment of acute, subacute, chronic, or
postoperative lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
For acute, subacute, chronic and post-operative epicondylalgia patients.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Exercises are generally individualized and increased over time. Stretching exercises are
frequently included and often are progressed to strengthening exercises. However, there is
no quality evidence to recommend one exercise regimen in preference to another. There
also is no quality evidence in favor or against any single type of exercise (e.g., stretching or
strengthening; eccentric or concentric). Frequency ranges from daily to three times daily.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of elbow pain, intolerance or lack of efficacy.
Rationale
There are multiple randomized studies of exercise; however, there is no trial with a sham
group. There also is no quality trial with only exercise as an isolated intervention. One highquality trial suggested no long-term benefits of exercise for treatment of chronic lateral
epicondylalgia patients, resulting in downgrading of this recommendation and inclusion of
more selective criteria (Coombes et al., 2013). One moderate-quality trial suggested no
benefits from immediate compared with delayed physical therapy (Park et al., 2010). There
is one trial comparing physiotherapy with wait and see and injection; however, the
physiotherapy included multiple cointerventions that also included manipulation (Bisset et
al., 2006, Bisset et al., 2009). This trial also found equivalency between the physiotherapy
and wait-and-see groups at one year, although injection was superior in the short-term. The
other moderate-quality trial with a noninterventional control group appears underpowered,
as there were small sample sizes and trends in the data in support of exercise (Tonks et al.,
2007). That trial also found no additive benefit of exercise in addition to glucocorticoid
injection, although trends in support of a combined approach were also present in the data.
One moderate-quality trial found an exercise group superior to ultrasound, potentially
suggesting modest benefits from exercise (Pienimaki et al., 1996) and the follow-up study

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

81

also reported superior results with less need of surgery in the exercise group compared to
ultrasound (6% vs. 36%) (Pienimaki et al., 1998). Most trials have unstructured physical
therapy that precludes identification of the effects of a specific exercise program, although
one trial failed to discern differences between eccentric and concentric exercises (MartinezSilvestrini et al., 2005). Thus, there is no quality evidence of efficacy of exercise.
Nevertheless, the large numbers of trials with exercise included as a co-intervention (Smidt
et al., 2002, Bisset et al., 2006, Struijs et al., 2004, Bisset et al., 2005, Svernlov et al., 2001,
Newcomer et al., 2001, Nimgade et al., 2005, Trudel et al., 2004, Stasinopoulos et al., 2006,
Pienimaki et al., 1996, Martinez-Silvestrini et al., 2005, Finestone et al., 2008, Langen-Pieters
et al., 2003) documents that exercise is thought to be important for treatment and recovery.
Exercise is not invasive, has low adverse effects, is low to high cost depending on numbers
of treatments and is recommended.
Evidence
There are 2 high- and 9 moderate-quality RCTs (one with 2 reports) incorporated into this
analysis. There are 6 low-quality RCTs or pseudorandomized controlled trials in Appendix 1.

MEDICATIONS
NSAIDS FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SUBACUTE, AND CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
NSAIDs are recommended for treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic lateral or medial
epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Indications
For acute, subacute, chronic, or post-operative epicondylalgia, NSAIDs are recommended
for treatment. Over-the-counter (OTC) agents may suffice and be tried first.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Per manufacturer’s recommendations. Trials have utilized diclofenac SR 75mg BID (Labelle
et al., 1997), Naproxen 500mg BID (Hay et al., 1999, Lewis et al., 2005, Stull et al., 1986,
Adelaar et al., 1987), and Diflunisal 1000mg then 500mg BID (Stull et al., 1986, Adelaar et
al., 1987). However, there is no quality evidence an NSAID is superior to another for these
indications. As needed, use may be reasonable for many patients. However, trials used
scheduled doses.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of elbow pain, lack of efficacy, or development of adverse effects that
necessitate discontinuation.
Rationale
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

82

There are a few quality trials for lateral epicondylalgia. The highest quality trial suggests
diclofenac was effective compared with placebo for treatment of a mixture of acute,
subacute, and chronic lateral epicondylalgia patients, although the magnitude of benefit
was not large (Labelle et al., 1997). Another trial found naproxen superior to placebo for
short-term duration (Lewis et al., 2005), although the same trial found a lack of benefit over
a longer term compared with placebo (Hay et al., 1999). One moderate-quality trial
comparing flurbiprofen to piroxicam suggested flurbiprofen was superior (Rosenthal, 1984),
thus piroxicam appears inferior for this indication. Two low-quality trials found equivalency
between diflunisal and naproxen (Stull et al., 1986, Adelaar et al., 1987). However, no other
quality studies suggest superiority of one oral NSAID over another or of one class over
another, or for other musculoskeletal disorders (see other guidelines).
One low-quality trial suggested superiority of combining glucocorticosteroid injection with
NSAID compared with NSAID alone at one month, although it did not report longer-term
results (Toker et al., 2008). There are no quality studies of postoperative elbow pain;
however, by analogy to other MSDs including hand surgeries (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm
Disorders guideline), successful treatment of elbow pain may be reasonably anticipated.
While there are no quality trials for elbow disorders, COX-selective agents are reviewed in
the ACOEM Hip and Groin Disorders and Knee Disorders guidelines; cytoprotective agents
are reviewed in the ACOEM Hip and Groin Disorders guideline.
For most patients, generic ibuprofen, naproxen, or other older-generation NSAIDs are
recommended as first-line medications. Second-line medications should include one of the
other generic medications. Acetaminophen (or the analog paracetamol) may be a
reasonable alternative for these patients, although most evidence suggests acetaminophen
is modestly less effective for arthrosis patients (see Hip and Groin Disorders guideline).
There is evidence that NSAIDs are as effective for relief of pain as opioids and less impairing
(see Chronic Pain and Low Back Disorders guidelines), including tramadol (Beaulieu et al.,
2008, Pavelka et al., 1998),and dextropropoxyphene (Parr et al., 1989), although slightly less
efficacious than codeine (Quiding et al., 1992, Kjaersgaard-Andersen et al., 1990).
These medications are not invasive, have relatively low adverse effects (particularly for
short-term use in employed age groups), are low cost, and thus are recommended.
Evidence
There are 1 high- and 2 moderate- (one with 2 reports) quality RCTs incorporated in this
analysis. There are 3 low-quality RCTs in Appendix 1.
NSAIDS FOR TREATMENT OF POSTOPERATIVE EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
NSAIDs are recommended for treatment of postoperative lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

83

Indications
For acute, subacute, chronic, or postoperative epicondylalgia, NSAIDs are recommended for
treatment. Over-the-counter (OTC) agents may suffice and be tried first.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Per manufacturer’s recommendations. Trials have utilized diclofenac SR 75mg BID (Labelle
et al., 1997), Naproxen 500mg BID (Hay et al., 1999, Lewis et al., 2005, Stull et al., 1986,
Adelaar et al., 1987), and Diflunisal 1000mg then 500mg BID (Stull et al., 1986, Adelaar et
al., 1987). However, there is no quality evidence an NSAID is superior to another for these
indications. As needed, use may be reasonable for many patients. However, trials used
scheduled doses.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of elbow pain, lack of efficacy, or development of adverse effects that
necessitate discontinuation.
Rationale
There are a few quality trials for lateral epicondylalgia. The highest quality trial suggests
diclofenac was effective compared with placebo for treatment of a mixture of acute,
subacute, and chronic lateral epicondylalgia patients, although the magnitude of benefit
was not large (Labelle et al., 1997). Another trial found naproxen superior to placebo for
short-term duration (Lewis et al., 2005), although the same trial found a lack of benefit over
a longer term compared with placebo (Hay et al., 1999). One moderate-quality trial
comparing flurbiprofen to piroxicam suggested flurbiprofen was superior (Rosenthal, 1984),
thus piroxicam appears inferior for this indication. Two low-quality trials found equivalency
between diflunisal and naproxen (Stull et al., 1986, Adelaar et al., 1987). However, no other
quality studies suggest superiority of one oral NSAID over another or of one class over
another, or for other musculoskeletal disorders (see other guidelines).
One low-quality trial suggested superiority of combining glucocorticosteroid injection with
NSAID compared with NSAID alone at one month, although it did not report longer-term
results (Toker et al., 2008). There are no quality studies of postoperative elbow pain;
however, by analogy to other MSDs including hand surgeries (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm
Disorders guideline); successful treatment of elbow pain may be reasonably anticipated.
While there are no quality trials for elbow disorders, COX-selective agents are reviewed in
the Hip and Groin Disorders and Knee Disorders guidelines; cytoprotective agents are
reviewed in the Hip and Groin Disorders guideline.
For most patients, generic ibuprofen, naproxen, or other older generation NSAIDs are
recommended as first-line medications. Second-line medications should include one of the
other generic medications. Acetaminophen (or the analog paracetamol) may be a
reasonable alternative for these patients, although most evidence suggests acetaminophen
is modestly less effective for arthrosis patients (see Hip and Groin Disorders guideline).
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

84

There is evidence that NSAIDs are as effective for relief of pain as opioids and less impairing
(see Chronic Pain and Low Back Disorders guideline) including tramadol and
dextropropoxyphene, although slightly less efficacious than codeine.
These medications are not invasive, have relatively low adverse effects profiles (particularly
for short-term use in employed age groups), are low cost, and thus are recommended.
Evidence
There are 1 high- and 2 moderate- (one with 2 reports) quality RCTs incorporated in this
analysis. There are 3 low-quality RCTs in Appendix 1.
ACETAMINOPHEN FOR TREATMENT OF EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
Acetaminophen is recommended for treatment of lateral or medial epicondylalgia,
particularly in patients with contraindications for NSAIDs.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Indications
All patients with elbow pain, including acute, subacute, chronic, and postoperative.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Per manufacturer’s recommendations; may be utilized on an as-needed basis. It has been
suggested that 1gm doses are more effective than 650mg doses particularly in postoperative patients (The Medical Letter, 2009, McQuay et al., 2002); however, this level is
now above the maximum dose recommended by an FDA advisory committee of 650mg and
evidence of hepatic toxicity has been reported at 4 gm/day in a few days particularly among
those consuming excessive alcohol. There is no quality evidence for superiority of 1gm
dosing for treatment of osteoarthrosis (The Medical Letter, 2009).
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of elbow pain, lack of efficacy, or development of adverse effects that
necessitate discontinuation.
Rationale
There are a few quality trials for lateral epicondylalgia. The highest quality trial suggests
diclofenac was effective compared with placebo for treatment of a mixture of acute,
subacute, and chronic lateral epicondylalgia patients, although the magnitude of benefit
was not large (Labelle et al., 1997). Another trial found naproxen superior to placebo for
short-term duration (Lewis et al., 2005), although the same trial found a lack of benefit over
a longer term compared with placebo (Hay et al., 1999). One moderate-quality trial

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

85

comparing flurbiprofen to piroxicam suggested flurbiprofen was superior (Rosenthal, 1984),
thus piroxicam appears inferior for this indication. Two low-quality trials found equivalency
between diflunisal and naproxen (Stull et al., 1986, Adelaar et al., 1987). However, no other
quality studies suggest superiority of one oral NSAID over another or of one class over
another, or for other musculoskeletal disorders (see other guidelines). One low-quality trial
suggested superiority of combining glucocorticosteroid injection with NSAID compared with
NSAID alone at one month although it did not report longer term results (Toker et al., 2008).
There are no quality studies of post-operative elbow pain; however, by analogy to other
MSDs including hand surgeries (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline);
successful treatment of elbow pain may be reasonably anticipated. While there are no
quality trials for elbow disorders, COX-selective agents are reviewed in the Hip and Groin
Disorders and Knee Disorders guidelines; cytoprotective agents are reviewed in the Hip and
Groin Disorders guideline. For most patients, generic ibuprofen, naproxen, or other older
generation NSAIDs are recommended as first-line medications. Second-line medications
should include one of the other generic medications. Acetaminophen (or the analog
paracetamol) may be a reasonable alternative for these patients, although most evidence
suggests acetaminophen is modestly less effective for arthrosis patients (see Hip and Groin
Disorders guideline). There is evidence that NSAIDs are as effective for relief of pain as
opioids and less impairing (see Chronic Pain and Low Back Disorders guidelines) including
tramadol , and dextropropoxyphene , although slightly less efficacious than codeine. These
medications are not invasive, have relatively low adverse effects profiles, particularly for
short duration use in employed age groups, are low cost and thus are recommended.
Evidence
There are 1 high- and 2 moderate- (one with 2 reports) quality RCTs incorporated in this
analysis. There are 3 low-quality RCTs in Appendix 1.
PROTON PUMP INHIBITORS (NSAIDS) FOR PATIENTS AT RISK FOR GI ADVERSE EFFECTS
Recommended
Concomitant prescriptions of cytoprotective medications are recommended for patients at
substantially increased risk for gastrointestinal bleeding. There are four commonly used
cytoprotective classes of drugs: misoprostol, sucralfate, histamine Type 2 receptor blockers
(famotidine, ranitidine, cimetidine, etc.), and proton pump inhibitors (esomeprazole,
lansoprazole, omeprazole, pantoprazole, rabeprazole). There is not generally believed to be
substantial differences in efficacy for prevention of gastrointestinal bleeding (Graham et al.,
2002) although evidence suggests the histamine-2 blockers are less effective for protection
of the gastric mucosa and evidence also suggests sucralfate is weaker than proton pump
inhibitors (see NSAIDs/acetaminophen recommendation). There also are combination products
of NSAIDs/misoprostol that have documented reductions in risk of endoscopic lesions (see
NSAIDs/acetaminophen recommendation).
Strength of evidence Strongly Recommended, Evidence (A)
Indications

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

86

For patients with a high-risk factor profile who also have indications for NSAIDs,
cytoprotective medications should be considered, particularly if longer term treatment is
contemplated. At-risk patients include those with a history of prior gastrointestinal
bleeding, elderly, diabetics, and cigarette smokers. Clinicians are cautioned that H2 blockers
might not protect from gastric ulcers (Robinson et al., 1991, Robinson et al., 1989,
Ehsanullah et al., 1988).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Proton pump inhibitors, misoprostol, sucralfate, H2 blockers recommended. Dose and
frequency per manufacturer. Duration is either that of the NSAID therapy, or sometimes
permanent for those with recurrent bleeds or other complications.
Indications for discontinuation
Intolerance, development of adverse effects, or discontinuation of NSAID.
Rationale
There are a few quality trials for lateral epicondylalgia. The highest quality trial suggests
diclofenac was effective compared with placebo for treatment of a mixture of acute,
subacute, and chronic lateral epicondylalgia patients, although the magnitude of benefit
was not large (Labelle et al., 1997). Another trial found naproxen superior to placebo for
short-term duration (Lewis et al., 2005), although the same trial found a lack of benefit over
a longer term compared with placebo (Hay et al., 1999). One moderate-quality trial
comparing flurbiprofen to piroxicam suggested flurbiprofen was superior (Rosenthal, 1984),
thus piroxicam appears inferior for this indication. Two low-quality trials found equivalency
between diflunisal and naproxen (Stull et al., 1986, Adelaar et al., 1987). However, no other
quality studies suggest superiority of one oral NSAID over another or of one class over
another, or for other musculoskeletal disorders (see other guidelines). One low-quality trial
suggested superiority of combining glucocorticosteroid injection with NSAID compared with
NSAID alone at one month although it did not report longer term results (Toker et al., 2008).
There are no quality studies of post-operative elbow pain; however, by analogy to other
MSDs including hand surgeries (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline);
successful treatment of elbow pain may be reasonably anticipated. While there are no
quality trials for elbow disorders, COX-selective agents are reviewed in the Hip and Groin
Disorders and Knee Disorders guidelines; cytoprotective agents are reviewed in the Hip and
Groin Disorders guideline. For most patients, generic ibuprofen, naproxen, or other older
generation NSAIDs are recommended as first-line medications. Second-line medications
should include one of the other generic medications. Acetaminophen (or the analog
paracetamol) may be a reasonable alternative for these patients, although most evidence
suggests acetaminophen is modestly less effective for arthrosis patients (see Hip and Groin
Disorders guideline). There is evidence that NSAIDs are as effective for relief of pain as
opioids and less impairing (see Chronic Pain and Low Back Disorders guidelines) including
tramadol , and dextropropoxyphene , although slightly less efficacious than codeine . These
medications are not invasive, have relatively low adverse effects profiles, particularly for
short duration use in employed age groups, are low cost and thus are recommended.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

87

Evidence
There are 1 high- and 2 moderate- (one with 2 reports) quality RCTs incorporated in this
analysis. There are 3 low-quality RCTs in Appendix 1.
MISOPROSTOL (NSAIDS) FOR PATIENTS AT RISK FOR GI ADVERSE EFFECTS
Recommended
Concomitant prescriptions of cytoprotective medications are recommended for patients at
substantially increased risk for gastrointestinal bleeding. There are four commonly used
cytoprotective classes of drugs: misoprostol, sucralfate, histamine Type 2 receptor blockers
(famotidine, ranitidine, cimetidine, etc.), and proton pump inhibitors (esomeprazole,
lansoprazole, omeprazole, pantoprazole, rabeprazole). There is not generally believed to be
substantial differences in efficacy for prevention of gastrointestinal bleeding (Graham et al.,
2002) although evidence suggests the histamine-2 blockers are less effective for protection
of the gastric mucosa and evidence also suggests sucralfate is weaker than proton pump
inhibitors (see NSAIDs/acetaminophen evidence table). There also are combination products
of NSAIDs/misoprostol that have documented reductions in risk of endoscopic lesions (see
NSAIDs/acetaminophen evidence table).
Strength of evidence Strongly Recommended, Evidence (A)
Indications
For patients with a high-risk factor profile who also have indications for NSAIDs,
cytoprotective medications should be considered, particularly if longer term treatment is
contemplated. At-risk patients include those with a history of prior gastrointestinal
bleeding, elderly, diabetics, and cigarette smokers. Clinicians are cautioned that H2 blockers
might not protect from gastric ulcers (Robinson et al., 1991, Robinson et al., 1989,
Ehsanullah et al., 1988).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Proton pump inhibitors, misoprostol, sucralfate, H2 blockers recommended. Dose and
frequency per manufacturer. Duration is either that of the NSAID therapy, or sometimes
permanent for those with recurrent bleeds or other complications.
Indications for discontinuation
Intolerance, development of adverse effects, or discontinuation of NSAID.
Rationale
There are a few quality trials for lateral epicondylalgia. The highest quality trial suggests
diclofenac was effective compared with placebo for treatment of a mixture of acute,
subacute, and chronic lateral epicondylalgia patients, although the magnitude of benefit

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

88

was not large (Labelle et al., 1997). Another trial found naproxen superior to placebo for
short-term duration (Lewis et al., 2005), although the same trial found a lack of benefit over
a longer term compared with placebo (Hay et al., 1999). One moderate-quality trial
comparing flurbiprofen to piroxicam suggested flurbiprofen was superior (Rosenthal, 1984),
thus piroxicam appears inferior for this indication. Two low-quality trials found equivalency
between diflunisal and naproxen (Stull et al., 1986, Adelaar et al., 1987). However, no other
quality studies suggest superiority of one oral NSAID over another or of one class over
another, or for other musculoskeletal disorders (see other guidelines). One low-quality trial
suggested superiority of combining glucocorticosteroid injection with NSAID compared with
NSAID alone at one month although it did not report longer term results (Toker et al., 2008).
There are no quality studies of post-operative elbow pain; however, by analogy to other
MSDs including hand surgeries (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline);
successful treatment of elbow pain may be reasonably anticipated. While there are no
quality trials for elbow disorders, COX-selective agents are reviewed in the Hip and Groin
Disorders and Knee Disorders guidelines; cytoprotective agents are reviewed in the Hip and
Groin Disorders guideline. For most patients, generic ibuprofen, naproxen, or other older
generation NSAIDs are recommended as first-line medications. Second-line medications
should include one of the other generic medications. Acetaminophen (or the analog
paracetamol) may be a reasonable alternative for these patients, although most evidence
suggests acetaminophen is modestly less effective for arthrosis patients (see Hip and Groin
Disorders guideline). There is evidence that NSAIDs are as effective for relief of pain as
opioids and less impairing (see Chronic Pain and Low Back Disorders guidelines) including
tramadol , and dextropropoxyphene , although slightly less efficacious than codeine . These
medications are not invasive, have relatively low adverse effects profiles, particularly for
short duration use in employed age groups, are low cost and thus are recommended.
Evidence
There are 1 high- and 2 moderate- (one with 2 reports) quality RCTs incorporated in this
analysis. There are 3 low-quality RCTs in Appendix 1.
SUCRALFATE (NSAIDS) FOR PATIENTS AT RISK FOR GI ADVERSE EFFECTS
Recommended
Concomitant prescriptions of cytoprotective medications are recommended for patients at
substantially increased risk for gastrointestinal bleeding. There are four commonly used
cytoprotective classes of drugs: misoprostol, sucralfate, histamine Type 2 receptor blockers
(famotidine, ranitidine, cimetidine, etc.), and proton pump inhibitors (esomeprazole,
lansoprazole, omeprazole, pantoprazole, rabeprazole). There is not generally believed to be
substantial differences in efficacy for prevention of gastrointestinal bleeding (Graham et al.,
2002) although evidence suggests the histamine-2 blockers are less effective for protection
of the gastric mucosa and evidence also suggests sucralfate is weaker than proton pump
inhibitors (see NSAIDs/acetaminophen evidence table). There also are combination products
of NSAIDs/misoprostol that have documented reductions in risk of endoscopic lesions (see
NSAIDs/acetaminophen evidence table).
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

89

Indications
For patients with a high-risk factor profile who also have indications for NSAIDs,
cytoprotective medications should be considered, particularly if longer term treatment is
contemplated. At-risk patients include those with a history of prior gastrointestinal
bleeding, elderly, diabetics, and cigarette smokers. Clinicians are cautioned that H2 blockers
might not protect from gastric ulcers (Robinson et al., 1991, Robinson et al., 1989,
Ehsanullah et al., 1988).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Proton pump inhibitors, misoprostol, sucralfate, H2 blockers recommended. Dose and
frequency per manufacturer. Duration is either that of the NSAID therapy, or sometimes
permanent for those with recurrent bleeds or other complications.
Indications for discontinuation
Intolerance, development of adverse effects, or discontinuation of NSAID.
Rationale
There are a few quality trials for lateral epicondylalgia. The highest quality trial suggests
diclofenac was effective compared with placebo for treatment of a mixture of acute,
subacute, and chronic lateral epicondylalgia patients, although the magnitude of benefit
was not large (Labelle et al., 1997). Another trial found naproxen superior to placebo for
short-term duration (Lewis et al., 2005), although the same trial found a lack of benefit over
a longer term compared with placebo (Hay et al., 1999). One moderate-quality trial
comparing flurbiprofen to piroxicam suggested flurbiprofen was superior (Rosenthal, 1984),
thus piroxicam appears inferior for this indication. Two low-quality trials found equivalency
between diflunisal and naproxen (Stull et al., 1986, Adelaar et al., 1987). However, no other
quality studies suggest superiority of one oral NSAID over another or of one class over
another, or for other musculoskeletal disorders (see other guidelines). One low-quality trial
suggested superiority of combining glucocorticosteroid injection with NSAID compared with
NSAID alone at one month although it did not report longer term results (Toker et al., 2008).
There are no quality studies of post-operative elbow pain; however, by analogy to other
MSDs including hand surgeries (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline);
successful treatment of elbow pain may be reasonably anticipated. While there are no
quality trials for elbow disorders, COX-selective agents are reviewed in the Hip and Groin
Disorders and Knee Disorders guidelines; cytoprotective agents are reviewed in the Hip and
Groin Disorders guideline. For most patients, generic ibuprofen, naproxen, or other older
generation NSAIDs are recommended as first-line medications. Second-line medications
should include one of the other generic medications. Acetaminophen (or the analog
paracetamol) may be a reasonable alternative for these patients, although most evidence
suggests acetaminophen is modestly less effective for arthrosis patients (see Hip and Groin
Disorders guideline). There is evidence that NSAIDs are as effective for relief of pain as
opioids and less impairing (see Chronic Pain and Low Back Disorders guidelines) including
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

90

tramadol , and dextropropoxyphene , although slightly less efficacious than codeine . These
medications are not invasive, have relatively low adverse effects profiles, particularly for
short duration use in employed age groups, are low cost and thus are recommended.
Evidence
There are 1 high- and 2 moderate- (one with 2 reports) quality RCTs incorporated in this
analysis. There are 3 low-quality RCTs in Appendix 1.
H2 BLOCKERS (NSAIDS) FOR PATIENTS AT RISK FOR GI ADVERSE EFFECTS
Recommended
Concomitant prescriptions of cytoprotective medications are recommended for patients at
substantially increased risk for gastrointestinal bleeding. There are four commonly used
cytoprotective classes of drugs: misoprostol, sucralfate, histamine Type 2 receptor blockers
(famotidine, ranitidine, cimetidine, etc.), and proton pump inhibitors (esomeprazole,
lansoprazole, omeprazole, pantoprazole, rabeprazole). There is not generally believed to be
substantial differences in efficacy for prevention of gastrointestinal bleeding (Graham et al.,
2002) although evidence suggests the histamine-2 blockers are less effective for protection
of the gastric mucosa and evidence also suggests sucralfate is weaker than proton pump
inhibitors (see NSAIDs/acetaminophen evidence table). There also are combination products
of NSAIDs/misoprostol that have documented reductions in risk of endoscopic lesions (see
NSAIDs/acetaminophen evidence table).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Indications
For patients with a high-risk factor profile who also have indications for NSAIDs,
cytoprotective medications should be considered, particularly if longer term treatment is
contemplated. At-risk patients include those with a history of prior gastrointestinal
bleeding, elderly, diabetics, and cigarette smokers. Clinicians are cautioned that H2 blockers
might not protect from gastric ulcers (Robinson et al., 1991, Robinson et al., 1989,
Ehsanullah et al., 1988).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Proton pump inhibitors, misoprostol, sucralfate, H2 blockers recommended. Dose and
frequency per manufacturer. Duration is either that of the NSAID therapy, or sometimes
permanent for those with recurrent bleeds or other complications.
Indications for discontinuation
Intolerance, development of adverse effects, or discontinuation of NSAID.
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

91

There are a few quality trials for lateral epicondylalgia. The highest quality trial suggests
diclofenac was effective compared with placebo for treatment of a mixture of acute,
subacute, and chronic lateral epicondylalgia patients, although the magnitude of benefit
was not large (Labelle et al., 1997). Another trial found naproxen superior to placebo for
short-term duration (Lewis et al., 2005), although the same trial found a lack of benefit over
a longer term compared with placebo (Hay et al., 1999). One moderate-quality trial
comparing flurbiprofen to piroxicam suggested flurbiprofen was superior (Rosenthal, 1984),
thus piroxicam appears inferior for this indication. Two low-quality trials found equivalency
between diflunisal and naproxen (Stull et al., 1986, Adelaar et al., 1987). However, no other
quality studies suggest superiority of one oral NSAID over another or of one class over
another, or for other musculoskeletal disorders (see other guidelines). One low-quality trial
suggested superiority of combining glucocorticosteroid injection with NSAID compared with
NSAID alone at one month although it did not report longer term results (Toker et al., 2008).
There are no quality studies of post-operative elbow pain; however, by analogy to other
MSDs including hand surgeries (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline);
successful treatment of elbow pain may be reasonably anticipated. While there are no
quality trials for elbow disorders, COX-selective agents are reviewed in the Hip and Groin
Disorders and Knee Disorders guidelines; cytoprotective agents are reviewed in the Hip and
Groin Disorders guideline. For most patients, generic ibuprofen, naproxen, or other older
generation NSAIDs are recommended as first-line medications. Second-line medications
should include one of the other generic medications. Acetaminophen (or the analog
paracetamol) may be a reasonable alternative for these patients, although most evidence
suggests acetaminophen is modestly less effective for arthrosis patients (see Hip and Groin
Disorders guideline). There is evidence that NSAIDs are as effective for relief of pain as
opioids and less impairing (see Chronic Pain and Low Back Disorders guidelines) including
tramadol , and dextropropoxyphene , although slightly less efficacious than codeine . These
medications are not invasive, have relatively low adverse effects profiles, particularly for
short duration use in employed age groups, are low cost and thus are recommended.
Evidence
There are 1 high- and 2 moderate- (one with 2 reports) quality RCTs incorporated in this
analysis. There are 3 low-quality RCTs in Appendix 1.
NSAIDS FOR PATIENTS AT RISK FOR CARDIOVASCULAR ADVERSE EFFECTS
Recommended
Patients with known cardiovascular disease or multiple risk factors for cardiovascular
disease should have the risks and benefits of NSAID therapy for pain discussed.
Acetaminophen or aspirin as the first-line therapy appear to be the safest regarding
cardiovascular adverse effects to use for these patients with cardiovascular disease risk
factors.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Frequency/Dose/Duration

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

92

If needed, NSAIDs that are non-selective are preferred over COX-2 specific drugs. In patients
receiving low-dose aspirin for primary or secondary cardiovascular disease prevention, to
minimize the potential for the NSAID to counteract the beneficial effects of aspirin, the
NSAID should be taken at least 30 minutes after or 8 hours before the daily aspirin (Antman
et al., 2007).
Rationale
There are a few quality trials for lateral epicondylalgia. The highest quality trial suggests
diclofenac was effective compared with placebo for treatment of a mixture of acute,
subacute, and chronic lateral epicondylalgia patients, although the magnitude of benefit
was not large (Labelle et al., 1997). Another trial found naproxen superior to placebo for
short-term duration (Lewis et al., 2005), although the same trial found a lack of benefit over
a longer term compared with placebo (Hay et al., 1999). One moderate-quality trial
comparing flurbiprofen to piroxicam suggested flurbiprofen was superior (Rosenthal, 1984),
thus piroxicam appears inferior for this indication. Two low-quality trials found equivalency
between diflunisal and naproxen (Stull et al., 1986, Adelaar et al., 1987). However, no other
quality studies suggest superiority of one oral NSAID over another or of one class over
another, or for other musculoskeletal disorders (see other guidelines). One low-quality trial
suggested superiority of combining glucocorticosteroid injection with NSAID compared with
NSAID alone at one month although it did not report longer term results (Toker et al., 2008).
There are no quality studies of post-operative elbow pain; however, by analogy to other
MSDs including hand surgeries (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline);
successful treatment of elbow pain may be reasonably anticipated. While there are no
quality trials for elbow disorders, COX-selective agents are reviewed in the Hip and Groin
Disorders and Knee Disorders guidelines; cytoprotective agents are reviewed in the Hip and
Groin Disorders guideline. For most patients, generic ibuprofen, naproxen, or other older
generation NSAIDs are recommended as first-line medications. Second-line medications
should include one of the other generic medications. Acetaminophen (or the analog
paracetamol) may be a reasonable alternative for these patients, although most evidence
suggests acetaminophen is modestly less effective for arthrosis patients (see Hip and Groin
Disorders guideline). There is evidence that NSAIDs are as effective for relief of pain as
opioids and less impairing (see Chronic Pain and Low Back Disorders guidelines) including
tramadol , and dextropropoxyphene , although slightly less efficacious than codeine . These
medications are not invasive, have relatively low adverse effects profiles, particularly for
short duration use in employed age groups, are low cost and thus are recommended.
Evidence
There are 1 high- and 2 moderate- (one with 2 reports) quality RCTs incorporated in this
analysis. There are 3 low-quality RCTs in Appendix 1.
ACETAMINOPHEN FOR PATIENTS AT RISK FOR CARDIOVASCULAR ADVERSE EFFECTS
Recommended
Patients with known cardiovascular disease or multiple risk factors for cardiovascular
disease should have the risks and benefits of NSAID therapy for pain discussed.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

93

Acetaminophen or aspirin as the first-line therapy appear to be the safest regarding
cardiovascular adverse effects to use for these patients with cardiovascular disease risk
factors.
Strength of evidence Strongly Recommended, Evidence (A)
Frequency/Dose/Duration
If needed, NSAIDs that are non-selective are preferred over COX-2 specific drugs. In patients
receiving low-dose aspirin for primary or secondary cardiovascular disease prevention, to
minimize the potential for the NSAID to counteract the beneficial effects of aspirin, the
NSAID should be taken at least 30 minutes after or 8 hours before the daily aspirin (Antman
et al., 2007).
Rationale
There are a few quality trials for lateral epicondylalgia. The highest quality trial suggests
diclofenac was effective compared with placebo for treatment of a mixture of acute,
subacute, and chronic lateral epicondylalgia patients, although the magnitude of benefit
was not large (Labelle et al., 1997). Another trial found naproxen superior to placebo for
short-term duration (Lewis et al., 2005), although the same trial found a lack of benefit over
a longer term compared with placebo (Hay et al., 1999). One moderate-quality trial
comparing flurbiprofen to piroxicam suggested flurbiprofen was superior (Rosenthal, 1984),
thus piroxicam appears inferior for this indication. Two low-quality trials found equivalency
between diflunisal and naproxen (Stull et al., 1986, Adelaar et al., 1987). However, no other
quality studies suggest superiority of one oral NSAID over another or of one class over
another, or for other musculoskeletal disorders (see other guidelines). One low-quality trial
suggested superiority of combining glucocorticosteroid injection with NSAID compared with
NSAID alone at one month although it did not report longer term results (Toker et al., 2008).
There are no quality studies of post-operative elbow pain; however, by analogy to other
MSDs including hand surgeries (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline);
successful treatment of elbow pain may be reasonably anticipated. While there are no
quality trials for elbow disorders, COX-selective agents are reviewed in the Hip and Groin
Disorders and Knee Disorders guidelines; cytoprotective agents are reviewed in the Hip and
Groin Disorders guideline. For most patients, generic ibuprofen, naproxen, or other older
generation NSAIDs are recommended as first-line medications. Second-line medications
should include one of the other generic medications. Acetaminophen (or the analog
paracetamol) may be a reasonable alternative for these patients, although most evidence
suggests acetaminophen is modestly less effective for arthrosis patients (see Hip and Groin
Disorders guideline). There is evidence that NSAIDs are as effective for relief of pain as
opioids and less impairing (see Chronic Pain and Low Back Disorders guidelines) including
tramadol , and dextropropoxyphene , although slightly less efficacious than codeine . These
medications are not invasive, have relatively low adverse effects profiles, particularly for
short duration use in employed age groups, are low cost and thus are recommended.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

94

There are 1 high- and 2 moderate- (one with 2 reports) quality RCTs incorporated in this
analysis. There are 3 low-quality RCTs in Appendix 1.
ASPIRIN FOR PATIENTS AT RISK FOR CARDIOVASCULAR ADVERSE EFFECTS
Recommended
Patients with known cardiovascular disease or multiple risk factors for cardiovascular
disease should have the risks and benefits of NSAID therapy for pain discussed.
Acetaminophen or aspirin as the first-line therapy appear to be the safest regarding
cardiovascular adverse effects to use for these patients with cardiovascular disease risk
factors.
Strength of evidence Strongly Recommended, Evidence (A)
Frequency/Dose/Duration
If needed, NSAIDs that are non-selective are preferred over COX-2 specific drugs. In patients
receiving low-dose aspirin for primary or secondary cardiovascular disease prevention, to
minimize the potential for the NSAID to counteract the beneficial effects of aspirin, the
NSAID should be taken at least 30 minutes after or 8 hours before the daily aspirin (Antman
et al., 2007).
Rationale
There are a few quality trials for lateral epicondylalgia. The highest quality trial suggests
diclofenac was effective compared with placebo for treatment of a mixture of acute,
subacute, and chronic lateral epicondylalgia patients, although the magnitude of benefit
was not large (Labelle et al., 1997). Another trial found naproxen superior to placebo for
short-term duration (Lewis et al., 2005), although the same trial found a lack of benefit over
a longer term compared with placebo (Hay et al., 1999). One moderate-quality trial
comparing flurbiprofen to piroxicam suggested flurbiprofen was superior (Rosenthal, 1984),
thus piroxicam appears inferior for this indication. Two low-quality trials found equivalency
between diflunisal and naproxen (Stull et al., 1986, Adelaar et al., 1987). However, no other
quality studies suggest superiority of one oral NSAID over another or of one class over
another, or for other musculoskeletal disorders (see other guideline). One low-quality trial
suggested superiority of combining glucocorticosteroid injection with NSAID compared with
NSAID alone at one month although it did not report longer term results (Toker et al., 2008).
There are no quality studies of post-operative elbow pain; however, by analogy to other
MSDs including hand surgeries (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline);
successful treatment of elbow pain may be reasonably anticipated. While there are no
quality trials for elbow disorders, COX-selective agents are reviewed in the Hip and Groin
Disorders and Knee Disorders guidelines; cytoprotective agents are reviewed in the Hip and
Groin Disorders guideline. For most patients, generic ibuprofen, naproxen, or other older
generation NSAIDs are recommended as first-line medications. Second-line medications
should include one of the other generic medications. Acetaminophen (or the analog
paracetamol) may be a reasonable alternative for these patients, although most evidence
suggests acetaminophen is modestly less effective for arthrosis patients (see Hip and Groin

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

95

Disorders guideline). There is evidence that NSAIDs are as effective for relief of pain as
opioids and less impairing (see Chronic Pain and Low Back Disorders guidelines) including
tramadol , and dextropropoxyphene , although slightly less efficacious than codeine . These
medications are not invasive, have relatively low adverse effects profiles, particularly for
short duration use in employed age groups, are low cost and thus are recommended.
Evidence
There are 1 high- and 2 moderate- (one with 2 reports) quality RCTs incorporated in this
analysis. There are 3 low-quality RCTs in Appendix 1.
TOPICAL NSAIDS FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SUBACUTE, AND CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
Topical NSAIDs are recommended for treatment of acute, subacute, and chronic lateral and
medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Indications
For acute, subacute, chronic, or post-operative epicondylalgia, topical NSAIDs are
recommended for treatment. For most patients, oral medications are recommended.
However for those with contraindications for oral NSAIDs or intolerance, topical NSAIDs may
be a reasonable alternative.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Per manufacturer’s recommendations. Quality trials have utilized DHEP lecithin 1. 3% gel
(Spacca et al., 2005), Flurbiprofen local-action transcutaneous patch (40 mg BID) (Ritchie,
1996), piroxicam gel (3cm, 0. 5%, approximately 0. 9g QID) (Ritchie, 1996), 2% diclofenac
sodium in a pluronic lecithin liposome organo-gel (PLO) (Burnham et al., 1998) and
diclofenac sodium gel (Schapira et al., 1991). The one crossover trial suggests flurbiprofen
was superior to piroxicam, which parallels the results of another RCT for the same two oral
medications.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of elbow pain, lack of efficacy, or development of adverse effects that
necessitate discontinuation.
Rationale
Three placebo-controlled trials address topical NSAIDS for epicondylalgia (Spacca et al.,
2005, Burnham et al., 1998, Schapira et al., 1991). The highest quality trial was for patients
with acute pain who had excellent prognoses with resolution of the symptoms in a few days
and consequently did not demonstrate a difference with placebo (Spacca et al., 2005). The

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

96

other trials suggested superiority to placebo (Burnham et al., 1998, Schapira et al., 1991).
The one randomized crossover trial found flurbiprofen superior to piroxicam (Ritchie, 1996),
suggesting piroxicam should not be either a first- or second-line treatment with either oral
or topical preparations. Evidence is moderate for treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic
patients. Quality evidence is absent for post-operative patients. There are no studies
comparing topical agents with oral NSAIDs. Quality studies are available on topical NSAIDs
including acute, subacute, and chronic lateral epicondylalgia patients and there is evidence
of benefits. This option is not invasive, has low adverse effects, and is low cost for shortterm use, although of higher cost for prolonged applications. Topical NSAIDs are
recommended as a treatment option.
Evidence
There are 4 moderate-quality RCTs and randomized crossover trials incorporated in this
analysis. There are 3 low quality RCTs in Appendix 1.
TOPICAL NSAIDS FOR TREATMENT OF POSTOPERATIVE EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
Topical NSAIDs are recommended for treatment of acute, subacute, chronic, or
postoperative lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
For acute, subacute, chronic, or post-operative epicondylalgia, topical NSAIDs are
recommended for treatment. For most patients, oral medications are recommended.
However for those with contraindications for oral NSAIDs or intolerance, topical NSAIDs may
be a reasonable alternative.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Per manufacturer’s recommendations. Quality trials have utilized DHEP lecithin 1. 3% gel
(Spacca et al., 2005), Flurbiprofen local-action transcutaneous patch (40 mg BID) (Ritchie,
1996), piroxicam gel (3cm, 0. 5%, approximately 0. 9g QID) (Ritchie, 1996), 2% diclofenac
sodium in a pluronic lecithin liposome organo-gel (PLO) (Burnham et al., 1998) and
diclofenac sodium gel (Schapira et al., 1991). The one crossover trial suggests flurbiprofen
was superior to piroxicam, which parallels the results of another RCT for the same two oral
medications.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of elbow pain, lack of efficacy, or development of adverse effects that
necessitate discontinuation.
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

97

Three placebo-controlled trials address topical NSAIDS for epicondylalgia (Spacca et al.,
2005, Burnham et al., 1998, Schapira et al., 1991). The highest quality trial was for patients
with acute pain who had excellent prognoses with resolution of the symptoms in a few days
and consequently did not demonstrate a difference with placebo (Spacca et al., 2005). The
other trials suggested superiority to placebo (Burnham et al., 1998, Schapira et al., 1991).
The one randomized crossover trial found flurbiprofen superior to piroxicam (Ritchie, 1996),
suggesting piroxicam should not be either a first- or second-line treatment with either oral
or topical preparations. Evidence is moderate for treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic
patients. Quality evidence is absent for post-operative patients. There are no studies
comparing topical agents with oral NSAIDs. Quality studies are available on topical NSAIDs
including acute, subacute, and chronic lateral epicondylalgia patients and there is evidence
of benefits. This option is not invasive, has low adverse effects, and is low cost for shortterm use, although of higher cost for prolonged applications. Topical NSAIDs are
recommended as a treatment option.
Evidence
There are 4 moderate-quality RCTs and randomized crossover trials incorporated in this
analysis. There are 3 low quality RCTs in Appendix 1.
OPIOIDS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
Not Recommended
Opioids are not recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic lateral or medial
epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating opioids for treating lateral epicondylalgia. Opioids
cause significant adverse effects – poor tolerance, constipation, drowsiness, clouded
judgment, memory loss, and potential misuse or dependence have been reported in up to
35% of patients. Quality trials report that approximately 20 to 75% of patients are unable to
tolerate these medications (see Chronic Pain guideline). Before prescribing opioids, patients
should be informed of these potential adverse effects and cautioned against operating
motor vehicles or machinery. Opioids do not appear to be more effective than safer
analgesics for managing most musculoskeletal symptoms; they should only be used if
needed for severe pain or for a short time in the post-operative time. Opioids are not
invasive, have a high adverse effect profile, and are low cost. They are not recommended
for treatment of epicondylalgia patients, except as a brief postoperative course.
Evidence
There are no quality trials evaluating the use of opioids for treatment of pain from lateral
epicondylalgia.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

98

OPIOIDS FOR SELECT PATIENTS WITH POSTOPERATIVE EPICONDYLALGIA
Sometimes Recommended
Opioids are recommended for select treatment of patients with postoperative lateral or
medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
For post-operative epicondylalgia, a brief course of a few days to approximately a week of
an opioid is recommended for treatment. Opioids may be helpful for brief nocturnal use
after surgery. For other epicondylalgia patients, opioids are not recommended. Most
patients should attempt pain control with NSAIDs prior to opioids. Wean from opioids as
early as possible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Per manufacturer’s recommendations; generally patients require no more than a few days
of treatment with opioids for most epicondylar surgeries.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of elbow pain, sufficient control with other medications, lack of efficacy, or
development of adverse effects that necessitate discontinuation.
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating opioids for treating lateral epicondylalgia. Opioids
cause significant adverse effects – poor tolerance, constipation, drowsiness, clouded
judgment, memory loss, and potential misuse or dependence have been reported in up to
35% of patients. Quality trials report that approximately 20 to 75% of patients are unable to
tolerate these medications (see Chronic Pain guideline). Before prescribing opioids, patients
should be informed of these potential adverse effects and cautioned against operating
motor vehicles or machinery. Opioids do not appear to be more effective than safer
analgesics for managing most musculoskeletal symptoms; they should only be used if
needed for severe pain or for a short time in the post-operative time. Opioids are not
invasive, have a high adverse effect profile, and are low cost. They are not recommended
for treatment of epicondylalgia patients, except as a brief post-operative course.
Evidence
There are no quality trials evaluating the use of opioids for treatment of pain from lateral
epicondylalgia.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

99

ANTIEMETICS
See the ACOEM Antiemetics Guideline.

ALLIED HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
PHYSICAL OR OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, CHRONIC, OR
POSTOPERATIVE EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
Physical or occupational therapy is recommended for the treatment of acute, subacute,
chronic, or postoperative lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
For highly select acute, subacute, chronic and post-operative epicondylalgia patients.
Generally moderately to severely affected patients are thought to be better candidates for
supervised therapy sessions. Milder cases may benefit from no more than 2 or 3
appointments to help educate, prevent debility, and institute a home exercise program. One
moderate-quality trial suggested no benefits from earlier physical therapy (Park et al.,
2010).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Exercises are generally individualized and increased over time. Many therapists combine
exercises with other treatment modalities. Stretching exercises are frequently included and
progress to strengthening exercises. However, there is no quality evidence to recommend
one exercise regimen in preference to another. There also is no quality evidence in favor or
against any single type of exercise (e.g., stretching or strengthening). Frequency of
appointments is usually individualized based on severity of the disorder, prior response to
treatment, and job demands. Two to three appointments per week for two weeks are often
used to initiate an exercise program for more severely affected patients. Total numbers of
appointments may be as few as 2 to 3 for mild patients or up to 12 to 15 for more severely
affected patients.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of elbow pain, intolerance, lack of efficacy or non-compliance including noncompliance with home exercises prescribed.
Rationale
There are multiple randomized studies of exercise; however, there is no trial with a sham
group. There also is no quality trial with only exercise as an isolated intervention. One highquality trial suggested no long-term benefits of exercise for treatment of chronic lateral
epicondylalgia patients, resulting in downgrading of this recommendation and inclusion of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

100

more selective criteria (Coombes et al., 2013). One moderate-quality trial suggested no
benefits from immediate compared with delayed physical therapy (Park et al., 2010). There
is one trial comparing physiotherapy with wait and see and injection; however, the
physiotherapy included multiple cointerventions that also included manipulation (Bisset et
al., 2006, Bisset et al., 2009). This trial also found equivalency between the physiotherapy
and wait-and-see groups at one year, although injection was superior in the short-term. The
other moderate-quality trial with a noninterventional control group appears underpowered,
as there were small sample sizes and trends in the data in support of exercise (Tonks et al.,
2007). That trial also found no additive benefit of exercise in addition to glucocorticoid
injection, although trends in support of a combined approach were also present in the data.
One moderate-quality trial found an exercise group superior to ultrasound, potentially
suggesting modest benefits from exercise (Pienimaki et al., 1996) and the follow-up study
also reported superior results with less need of surgery in the exercise group compared to
ultrasound (6% vs. 36%) (Pienimaki et al., 1998). Most trials have unstructured physical
therapy that precludes identification of the effects of a specific exercise program, although
one trial failed to discern differences between eccentric and concentric exercises (MartinezSilvestrini et al., 2005). Thus, there is no quality evidence of efficacy of exercise.
Nevertheless, the large numbers of trials with exercise included as a co-intervention (Smidt
et al., 2002, Bisset et al., 2006, Struijs et al., 2004, Bisset et al., 2005, Svernlov et al., 2001,
Newcomer et al., 2001, Nimgade et al., 2005, Trudel et al., 2004, Stasinopoulos et al., 2006,
Pienimaki et al., 1996, Martinez-Silvestrini et al., 2005, Finestone et al., 2008, Langen-Pieters
et al., 2003) documents that exercise is thought to be important for treatment and recovery.
Exercise is not invasive, has low adverse effects, is low to high cost depending on numbers
of treatments and is recommended.
Evidence
There are 2 high- and 9 moderate-quality RCTs (one with 2 reports) incorporated into this
analysis. There are 6 low-quality RCTs or pseudorandomized controlled trials in Appendix 1.
IONTOPHORESIS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
Iontophoresis with administration of either glucocorticosteroids or NSAIDs is moderately
recommended for the treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic lateral or medial
epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Indications
For acute, subacute, or chronic epicondylalgia patients; patients who cannot tolerate oral
NSAIDs; or patients who fail other treatments (e.g., insufficient pain relief with elbow straps
and activity modification) may be ideal candidates. Generally moderately to severely
affected patients are thought to be better candidates.
Frequency/Dose/Duration

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

101

Various medications have been used in the quality studies. These include dexamethasone
(Nirschl et al., 2003, Runeson et al., 2002), naproxen (Baskurt et al., 2003), and ketorolac
(Saggini et al., 1996). There are no quality comparative trials to suggest one regimen is
superior to another with the exception that sodium salicylate was inferior to diclofenac
(Demirtas et al., 1998). The highest quality study utilized a regimen of 6 treatments over 15
days (Nirschl et al., 2003). Thus, 6 treatments over 15 days are recommended. One
additional set of up to 6 more treatments should be based on objective evidence of
continuing functional improvements.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, intolerance, lack of efficacy or non-compliance.
Rationale
There are four moderate-quality trials. The highest quality trial suggested efficacy of
dexamethasone compared with placebo (Nirschl et al., 2003). The other study comparing
dexamethasone with placebo was lower quality, substantially smaller in size and found lack
of efficacy, though may have been underpowered (Runeson et al., 2002). Two other
placebo-controlled trials found efficacy, one with ketorolac (Saggini et al., 1996) and the
other with diclofenac (Vecchini et al., 1984). All trials suggest no more than modest
improvements. One trial compared two methods of administering naproxen and found
equal efficacy (Baskurt et al., 2003). However, another moderate quality trial found
diclofenac superior to sodium salicylate (Demirtas et al., 1998). Iontophoresis with
glucocorticoids or NSAIDs are not invasive, have low adverse effects, are moderately costly
and are recommended.
Evidence
There are 6 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated into this analysis.
ULTRASOUND FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
Ultrasound is recommended for the treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic lateral or
medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Indications
For acute, subacute, or chronic epicondylalgia patients; patients who cannot tolerate oral
NSAIDs and exercise; or patients who fail other treatments (e.g., insufficient pain relief with
elbow straps and activity modification) may be ideal candidates. Generally moderately to
severely affected patients are thought to be better candidates. Overall effect of ultrasound

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

102

appears modest; thus, other interventions are recommended first, particularly exercise
(Pienimaki et al., 1996).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Various regimens have been utilized in the quality studies. The two trials showing the most
benefit utilized 10 to 12 treatments (1. 0MHz, 1-2W/cm2 for 5 to 10 minutes per session)
over 4 to 6 weeks (Lundeberg et al., 1988, Binder et al., 1985). There are no comparative
trials for different regimens.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, intolerance, lack of efficacy or non-compliance.
Rationale
There are two high- and two moderate-quality sham-controlled trials that address
ultrasound. The two high-quality trials (D'Vaz et al., 2006, Haker et al., 1991) both found
ultrasound ineffective while the two moderate-quality trials found it effective (Lundeberg et
al., 1988, Binder et al., 1985). However, the two moderate-quality trials both had larger
sample sizes. (However, these are both older trials. Thus, the score may understate the true
quality of the trials.) There is quality evidence that exercise is superior to ultrasound
(Pienimaki et al., 1996). There also is evidence ultrasound is superior to chiropractic care
(Langen-Pieters et al., 2003). Four moderate-quality trials included ultrasound as a cointervention, thus utility of ultrasound is unable to be assessed from these studies (Smidt et
al., 2002, Struijs et al., 2004, Struijs et al., 2003, Stratford et al., 1989). Thus, there is overall
evidence of a modest benefit from ultrasound. Ultrasound is not invasive, has few adverse
effects, but is moderately costly. As the overall evidence is for a modest benefit, it is
recommended particularly for patients who fail other interventions.
Evidence
There are 2 high- and 10 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated into this analysis. There are 2
low-quality RCTs in Appendix 1.
SOFT TISSUE MOBILIZATION FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
Not Recommended
Soft tissue mobilization is not recommended for the treatment of acute, subacute, or
chronic lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Evidence
There are no quality trials evaluating soft tissue mobilization for treatment of lateral or
medial epicondylalgia.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

103

MANIPULATION AND MOBILIZATION FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC
EPICONDYLALGIA
Not Recommended
Manipulation or mobilization is not recommended for the treatment of acute, subacute, or
chronic lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Rationale
One high-quality trial included manipulation in addition to exercises and found no long-term
benefits (Coombes et al., 2013). There is 1 moderate-quality randomized controlled trial
comparing the additive value of soft tissue mobilization to a combination of stretching
exercises, computer workstation advice plus generic NSAID (Blanchette et al., 2011). As that
trial also found no evidence of additive benefits of soft tissue mobilization, neither
manipulation nor mobilization is recommended for treatment of lateral epicondylalgia.

While there are a few moderate-quality trials, there are no sham-controlled trials that
address manipulation or for the treatment of lateral epicondylalgia. One moderate-quality
trial utilized manipulation as a co-intervention, thus precluding use of the trial for evidence
based guidance (Bisset et al., 2006, Bisset et al., 2009). Two other moderate-quality studies
conflicted. One suggested manipulation (mostly of the wrist) was superior to a combination
of friction massage, ultrasound and exercise (Struijs et al., 2003). The other suggested
ultrasound was superior to chiropractic care (Langen-Pieters et al., 2003). Thus, the
currently available evidence conflicts regarding whether manipulation is beneficial and
there is no recommendation for or against use of manipulation.
Evidence
There is 1 high- and 5 moderate-quality RCTs or randomized crossover experimental studies
(one with two reports) incorporated in this analysis. There are 5 low-quality RCTs in
Appendix 1.
MASSAGE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of massage, including friction massage,
for the treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies of massage for treatment of epicondylalgia. There are
moderate-quality trials that included friction massage for lateral epicondylalgia, but none
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

104

utilized a no-treatment or sham-control group. All moderate-quality trials had cointerventions (Smidt et al., 2002, Struijs et al., 2004, Struijs et al., 2003, Stratford et al.,
1989), effectively precluding evidence-based guidance. Thus, there is no recommendation
for or against the use of either massage or friction massage.
Evidence
There are 4 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated into this analysis. There is 1 low-quality RCT
in Appendix 1.
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
Sometimes Recommended
Acupuncture is recommended for the treatment of select patients with chronic lateral or
medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Chronic epicondylalgia patients; patients who fail to sufficiently respond to treatment with
NSAIDs (oral and/or topical), exercise, or patients who fail other treatments (e.g.,
insufficient pain relief with elbow straps and activity modification) may be ideal candidates.
Glucocorticosteroid injections are also reasonable intervention(s) to attempt before
acupuncture. Generally moderately to severely affected patients are thought to be better
candidates. Overall benefits of acupuncture appear modest and efficacy appears to be
transient, disappearing after a few weeks.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Various regimens have been utilized in the quality studies. The sites used were LI 4, 10, 11;
L5, SJ5, Ah-Shi over muscle origin of lateral extensor group (Davidson et al., 2001) and the
second used LI 4, 10, 11, 12, TW5 (Fink et al., 2002, Fink et al., 2002). Both manually
stimulated needles (de qi) placed for 15 to 20 minutes. Regimens were 2 to 3 treatments a
week for 8 to 10 treatments (Fink et al., 2002, Fink et al., 2002, Davidson et al., 2001).
Patients should demonstrate benefit after 4 to 5 appointments otherwise either the
technique should be altered or acupuncture discontinued. The two trials showing the most
benefit utilized 10 to 12 treatments (1. 0MHz, 1-2W/cm2 for 5 to 10 minutes a session) over
4 to 6 weeks (Lundeberg et al., 1988, Binder et al., 1985). There are no comparative trials for
different regimens.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, intolerance, lack of efficacy, or non-compliance.
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

105

There are multiple moderate-quality trials of acupuncture for treatment of lateral
epicondylalgia. There are 3 moderate-quality trials with 4 reports that attempted sham
treatment. Two of those are potentially usable for purposes of developing guidance. One
suggested potential modest short term benefit (Fink et al., 2002, Fink et al., 2002) and the
other suggest benefit of deep needle insertion compared with superficial needle insertion
(Haker et al., 1990). Another trial suggested comparable efficacy to ultrasound (Davidson et
al., 2001). Thus, the overall quality of the literature is relatively weak, results are somewhat
inconsistent. On average, they appear to suggest a modest, relatively short term benefit in
mostly chronic patients. Acupuncture is minimally invasive, has few adverse effects in the
extremities, and is moderately costly over several treatments. It is recommended for select
patients with chronic epicondylalgia unresponsive to several other treatments
Evidence
There are 6 moderate-quality RCTs (one with two reports) incorporated into this analysis.
There is 1 low-quality RCT in Appendix 1.
ACUPUNCTURE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR POSTOPERATIVE EPICONDYLALGIA
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of acupuncture for the treatment of
acute, subacute, or postoperative lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are multiple moderate-quality trials of acupuncture for treatment of lateral
epicondylalgia. There are 3 moderate-quality trials with 4 reports that attempted sham
treatment. Two of those are potentially usable for purposes of developing guidance. One
suggested potential modest short term benefit (Fink et al., 2002, Fink et al., 2002) and the
other suggest benefit of deep needle insertion compared with superficial needle insertion
(Haker et al., 1990). Another trial suggested comparable efficacy to ultrasound (Davidson et
al., 2001). Thus, the overall quality of the literature is relatively weak, results are somewhat
inconsistent. On average, they appear to suggest a modest, relatively short term benefit in
mostly chronic patients. Acupuncture is minimally invasive, has few adverse effects in the
extremities, and is moderately costly over several treatments. It is recommended for select
patients with chronic epicondylalgia unresponsive to several other treatments
Evidence
There are 6 moderate-quality RCTs (one with two reports) incorporated into this analysis.
There is 1 low-quality RCT in Appendix 1.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

106

BIOFEEDBACK FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of biofeedback for the treatment of
acute, subacute, or chronic lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There is one high-quality trial of an electrical stimulation device; however, it had a small
sample size, used an electrical current not usually used in devices, and contained sparse
results (Johannsen et al., 1993). There are no other quality studies for or against the use of
these treatments, thus there is no recommendation for or against their use.
Evidence
There is 1 high-quality randomized crossover trial incorporated into this analysis for
electrical stimulation. There is 1 low-quality RCT on electrical stimulation and 1 low-quality
randomized crossover trial on TENS in Appendix 1. There are no quality trials evaluating
biofeedback, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, or diathermy for the treatment of
lateral epicondylalgia.

HOT AND COLD THERAPIES
SELF-APPLICATION OF HEAT OR COLD FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, CHRONIC, OR
POSTOPERATIVE EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
Self-application of heat is recommended for the treatment of acute, subacute, chronic, or
postoperative lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
For acute, subacute, chronic and postoperative epicondylalgia.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Heat or cold may be reasonable treatments as self-applications, approximately 3 to 5 times
a day.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of elbow pain, intolerance or lack of efficacy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

107

Rationale
There are no quality trials of heat. There is one moderate-quality trial comparing ice after
exercise vs. exercise alone and found no evidence ice improved pain relief (Manias et al.,
2006). Another trial included ice massage as a co-intervention (Martinez-Silvestrini et al.,
2005). Heat and cryotherapy are not invasive, have low adverse effects and may have no
cost for at-home applications and are thus recommended. Lack of evidence of efficacy and
cost considerations do not support in-therapy applications and thus these are not
recommended.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality pseudorandomized pilot trial incorporated into this analysis.
SELF-APPLICATION OF COLD FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, CHRONIC, OR POSTOPERATIVE
EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
Self-application of cold is recommended for the treatment of acute, subacute, chronic, or
postoperative lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
For acute, subacute, chronic and postoperative epicondylalgia.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Heat or cold may be reasonable treatments as self-applications, approximately 3 to 5 times
a day.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of elbow pain, intolerance or lack of efficacy.
Rationale
There are no quality trials of heat. There is one moderate-quality trial comparing ice after
exercise vs. exercise alone and found no evidence ice improved pain relief (Manias et al.,
2006). Another trial included ice massage as a co-intervention (Martinez-Silvestrini et al.,
2005). Heat and cryotherapy are not invasive, have low adverse effects and may have no
cost for at-home applications and are thus recommended. Lack of evidence of efficacy and
cost considerations do not support in-therapy applications and thus these are not
recommended.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

108

There is 1 moderate-quality psuedorandomized pilot trial incorporated into this analysis.
DIATHERMY FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of diathermy for the treatment of acute,
subacute, or chronic lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There is one high-quality trial of an electrical stimulation device, however it had a small
sample size, used an electrical current not usually used in devices, and contained sparse
results (Johannsen et al., 1993). There are no other quality studies for or against the use of
these treatments, thus there is no recommendation for or against their use.
Evidence
There is 1 high-quality randomized crossover trial incorporated into this analysis for
electrical stimulation. There is 1 low-quality RCT on electrical stimulation and 1 low-quality
randomized crossover trial on TENS in Appendix 1. There are no quality trials evaluating
biofeedback, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, or diathermy for the treatment of
lateral epicondylalgia.

DEVICES
TENNIS ELBOW BANDS, STRAPS, AND BRACES FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, AND CHRONIC
EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
Tennis elbow bands, straps, and braces are recommended for the treatment of acute,
subacute, or chronic lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Acute, subacute and chronic epicondylalgia.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Devices generally worn daily, but not at night, or as-needed for more forceful exertions
(discontinue for less forceful activities during daily routine).
Indications for discontinuation

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

109

Resolution of elbow pain, intolerance, lack of efficacy, or pain radiating down the dorsum of
the forearm into the hand and/or numbness of the dorsum of the hand.
Rationale
Three moderate-quality trials assessed utility of these devices for treatment of
epicondylalgia – one compared a brace with no brace, but no sham-controlled trial. The trial
comparing a brace to no brace used a brace that is not commonly used (an off-loader wrist
brace). Additionally, this specific device was found to interfere with some workers’ jobs
(Faes et al., 2006). One moderate-quality trial compared a brace, ultrasound and laser with
exercises as co-interventions for all patients, finding mostly non-significant differences
(Oken et al., 2008). Another moderate-quality trial compared an elbow band with a
combination of an elbow band and a wrist splint, suggesting the wrist splint provided no
additive benefit while also interfering with work (Van De Streek et al., 2004). Another study
evaluated physical therapy, a brace or both for treatment of lateral epicondylalgia;
however, as the physical therapy regimen was not specified, the results are uninterpretable
(Struijs et al., 2004). One low-quality trial found equal efficacy for wrist supports compared
with elbow bands (see Appendix 1) (Altan et al., 2008). Braces, straps and bands are not
invasive, have low adverse effects, are low cost, and are recommended. There is no
moderate or high quality evidence for use of wrist braces for treatment of lateral
epicondylalgia. One low-quality trial has suggested efficacy (Garg et al., 2010), however, a
randomized crossover experimental design with only immediate results and without
followup found some evidence suggesting elbow straps and sleeves may be superior to wrist
braces (Jafarian et al., 2009). Some believe these braces rest the wrist and thus the extensor
mechanism. Considering the off-loader wrist brace appears successful, other wrist braces
may be reasonable options. Since available evidence does not suggest that elbow straps and
braces are clearly superior to wrist braces, it may be reasonable to employ a wrist brace first
in select cases after discussion with the patient regarding comfort, job requirements, other
functional requirements of hand and wrist, and patient tolerance.
Evidence
There are 5 moderate-quality RCTs or randomized crossover trials (one with two reports)
incorporated into this analysis. There are 7 low-quality RCTs or psuedorandomized
controlled trials and 2 experimental studies in Appendix 1.
COCK-UP WRIST BRACES FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
Cock-up wrist braces are recommended for the treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic
lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

110

Acute, subacute, or chronic epicondylalgia. Generally, elbow bands and straps are
recommended first, with wrist braces as possible adjunctive treatment for either more
severe cases and/or suboptimal results with elbow bands and straps (Jafarian et al., 2009).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Devices generally worn daily (not at night), or as-needed for more forceful exertions
(discontinue for less forceful activities during daily routine).
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of elbow pain, intolerance or lack of efficacy.
Rationale
Three moderate-quality trials assessed utility of these devices for treatment of
epicondylalgia – one compared a brace with no brace, but no sham-controlled trial. The trial
comparing a brace to no brace used a brace that is not commonly used (an off-loader wrist
brace). Additionally, this specific device was found to interfere with some workers’ jobs
(Faes et al., 2006). One moderate-quality trial compared a brace, ultrasound and laser with
exercises as co-interventions for all patients, finding mostly non-significant differences
(Oken et al., 2008). Another moderate-quality trial compared an elbow band with a
combination of an elbow band and a wrist splint, suggesting the wrist splint provided no
additive benefit while also interfering with work (Van De Streek et al., 2004). Another study
evaluated physical therapy, a brace or both for treatment of lateral epicondylalgia;
however, as the physical therapy regimen was not specified, the results are uninterpretable
(Struijs et al., 2004). One low-quality trial found equal efficacy for wrist supports compared
with elbow bands (see Appendix 1) (Altan et al., 2008). Braces, straps and bands are not
invasive, have low adverse effects, are low cost, and are recommended. There is no
moderate or high quality evidence for use of wrist braces for treatment of lateral
epicondylalgia. One low-quality trial has suggested efficacy (Garg et al., 2010), however, a
randomized crossover experimental design with only immediate results and without
followup found some evidence suggesting elbow straps and sleeves may be superior to wrist
braces (Jafarian et al., 2009). Some believe these braces rest the wrist and thus the extensor
mechanism. Considering the off-loader wrist brace appears successful, other wrist braces
may be reasonable options. Since available evidence does not suggest that elbow straps and
braces are clearly superior to wrist braces, it may be reasonable to employ a wrist brace first
in select cases after discussion with the patient regarding comfort, job requirements, other
functional requirements of hand and wrist, and patient tolerance.
Evidence
There are 5 moderate-quality RCTs or randomized crossover trials (one with two reports)
incorporated into this analysis. There are 7 low-quality RCTs or pseudorandomized
controlled trials and 2 experimental studies in Appendix 1.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

111

MAGNETS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of magnets for the treatment of acute,
subacute, or chronic lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies using magnets to treat lateral epicondylalgia. The one
moderate-quality trial comparing pulsed electromagnetic field with sham and glucocorticoid
injection appears to have been a mostly negative study for PEMF (Uzunca et al., 2007).
Quality studies suggest a lack of benefit for low back pain (see Low Back Disorders
guideline). This option is low cost, has few adverse effects, and is not invasive. However,
without quality evidence of efficacy, there is no recommendation for or against the use of
magnets or pulsed electromagnetic field for epicondylalgia.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality pseudorandomized clinical trial incorporated into this analysis.

ELECTRICAL THERAPIES
PULSED ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of pulsed electromagnetic field for the
treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies using magnets to treat lateral epicondylalgia. The one
moderate-quality trial comparing pulsed electromagnetic field with sham and glucocorticoid
injection appears to have been a mostly negative study for PEMF (Uzunca et al., 2007).
Quality studies suggest a lack of benefit for low back pain (see Low Back Disorders
guideline). This option is low cost, has few adverse effects, and is not invasive. However,
without quality evidence of efficacy, there is no recommendation for or against the use of
magnets or pulsed electromagnetic field for epicondylalgia.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality pseudorandomized clinical trial incorporated into this analysis.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

112

EXTRACORPOREAL SHOCKWAVE THERAPY FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC
EPICONDYLALGIA
Not Recommended
Extracorporeal shockwave therapy is strongly not recommended for the treatment of acute,
subacute, or chronic lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Strongly Not Recommended, Evidence (A)
Rationale
There are 9 high- or moderate-quality, sham-controlled (or low dose-controlled) trials that
address extracorporeal shockwave therapy for epicondylalgia. All three high-quality shamcontrolled trials, which included the largest sized study, failed to find evidence of efficacy
(Chung et al., 2004, Haake et al., 2002, Staples et al., 2008). Two moderate-quality trials
suggested efficacy (Pettrone et al., 2005, Spacca et al., 2005), while another moderatequality trial was negative (Speed et al., 2002). Three trials are of questionable quality due to
methodological issues including one with mixed diagnoses (Rompe et al., 2004, Rompe et
al., 1996, Mehra et al., 2003). The highest-quality evidence reports that extracorporeal
shockwave therapy is not effective, not invasive, has some adverse effects, is moderately
costly, and thus is not recommended.
Evidence
There are 3 high- and 8 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated into this analysis. There are 4
low-quality RCTs in Appendix 1.
PHONOPHORESIS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
Not Recommended
Phonophoresis is not recommended for the treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic lateral
or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Rationale
There are four moderate quality trials that used phonophoresis (Baskurt et al., 2003,
Klaiman et al., 1998, Stratford et al., 1989, Nagrale et al., 2009). None of these trials
documented efficacy of phonophoresis, thus phonophoresis is not recommended.
Evidence
There are 4 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated into this analysis. There is 1low-quality RCT
in Appendix 1.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

113

LOW-LEVEL LASER THERAPY FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
Not Recommended
Low-level laser therapy is moderately not recommended for the treatment of acute,
subacute, or chronic lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Moderately Not Recommended, Evidence (B)
Rationale
There are 12 high- and moderate-quality trials. The one high-quality trial suggested some
benefit (Vasseljen et al., 1992); however, all the moderate quality trials were either
completely negative or demonstrated no long term benefits (Haker et al., 1990, Haker et al.,
1991, Krasheninnikoff et al., 1994, Basford et al., 2000, Haker et al., 1991, Lundeberg et al.,
1987, Papadopoulos et al., 1996). Thus, absent quality evidence of efficacy, low-level laser
therapy is not recommended.
Evidence
There is 1 high- and 12 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated into this analysis. There are 2
low-quality RCT in Appendix 1.
TRANSCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR
CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (TENS) for the treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic lateral or medial
epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There is one high-quality trial of an electrical stimulation device, however it had a small
sample size, used an electrical current not usually used in devices, and contained sparse
results (Johannsen et al., 1993). There are no other quality studies for or against the use of
these treatments, thus there is no recommendation for or against their use.
Evidence
There is 1 high-quality randomized crossover trial incorporated into this analysis for
electrical stimulation. There is 1 low-quality RCT on electrical stimulation and 1 low-quality
randomized crossover trial on TENS in Appendix 1. There are no quality trials evaluating
biofeedback, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, or diathermy for the treatment of
lateral epicondylalgia.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

114

ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of electrical nerve stimulation for the
treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There is one high-quality trial of an electrical stimulation device, however it had a small
sample size, used an electrical current not usually used in devices, and contained sparse
results (Johannsen et al., 1993). There are no other quality studies for or against the use of
these treatments, thus there is no recommendation for or against their use.
Evidence
There is 1 high-quality randomized crossover trial incorporated into this analysis for
electrical stimulation. There is 1 low-quality RCT on electrical stimulation and 1 low-quality
randomized crossover trial on TENS in Appendix 1. There are no quality trials evaluating
biofeedback, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, or diathermy for the treatment of
lateral epicondylalgia.

INJECTION THERAPIES
GLUCOCORTICOSTEROID INJECTIONS FOR SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
Sometimes Recommended
Glucocorticosteroid (“steroid”) injections are recommended for the treatment of highly
selective subacute or chronic lateral epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Indications
Subacute or chronic epicondylalgia patients. Patients should have failed to respond
sufficiently to treatment with multiple different NSAIDs (oral and/or topical), exercise,
elbow straps and activity modification. Patients should be cautioned the symptoms
frequently recur after injection. Moderately to severely affected patients are thought to be
better candidates, particularly those thought to be surgical candidates who are attempting
to delay surgery in the hopes that the pain subsides.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
All quality trials have performed 1 injection and assessed the results, rather than performing
additional injections, unless the initial results were unsatisfactory. Most quality trials that
described the injection techniques utilized the most tender point (Hay et al., 1999, Lewis et

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

115

al., 2005, Verhaar et al., 1996), although two primarily targeted the tendon origin (Haker,
1993, Krogh et al., 2013). Medications in these trials varied and included
methylprednisolone 20mg (Hay et al., 1999, Lewis et al., 2005); triamcinolone acetonide
10mg (Smidt et al., 2002, Bisset et al., 2006, Bisset et al., 2009, Price et al., 1991, Solveborn
et al., 1995), 20mg (Price et al., 1991); triamcinolone acetate (Verhaar et al., 1996);
hydrocortisone 25mg (Price et al., 1991); betamethasone 6mg (Newcomer et al., 2001);
triamcinolone 0. 2mg (Haker, 1993); and triamcinolone 40mg (Krogh et al., 2013). The one
comparative trial suggested triamcinolone 10mg was superior to hydrocortisone 25mg
(Price et al., 1991). Trials have combined these injections with injectable anesthetics (e.g., 0.
5 to 2. 0 mL 1% lidocaine) (Hay et al., 1999, Lewis et al., 2005, Price et al., 1991, Verhaar et
al., 1996); 1. 0mL 2% lidocaine; 1% lignocaine (Coombes et al., 2013); and 4mL 0. 25%
bupivacaine (Newcomer et al., 2001). The one comparative trial suggested bupivacaine was
superior to lidocaine, and far outlasted the expected duration of anesthesia (Solveborn et
al., 1995). There also is some preliminary evidence that either dry needling or a multiple
puncture technique (“peppering”) may be effective, although none with a true control
group for the technique (Stenhouse G, 2013, Uygur E, 2017, Krogh et al., 2013, Altay et al.,
2002, Dogramaci et al., 2009).
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, intolerance, lack of efficacy or non-compliance. Lack of response should
result in reassessment of the diagnosis. Generally, there is an inclination to not use more
than approximately 3 glucocorticoid injections in any one location for one episode.
However, there is no evidence that there is or is not a limit on the number of injections
either for an episode or for a lifetime. Subsequent injections should be supported by either
objective improvement or utilization of a different technique or location for the injection(s).
Rationale
One high-quality trial found superior results for glucocorticoid compared with saline at 4
weeks, but worse results at 1 year, including more recurrences (Coombes et al., 2013).
Another high-quality trial found similar results over 3 months with the glucocorticoid
outperforming both saline and platelet rich plasma injections (Krogh et al., 2013). Another
high-quality trial found no difference with placebo injections at one month, though data
appear to suggest a trend towards efficacy (Lindenhovius et al., 2008); however, all
moderate-quality trials comparing glucocorticosteroid injection with placebo found short- to
intermediate-term benefits of injection (Hay et al., 1999, Lewis et al., 2005, Price et al.,
1991). Those results were essentially the same as the results that compared injection to no
treatment (“wait and see”) (Smidt et al., 2002, Bisset et al., 2006, Bisset et al., 2009, Tonks
et al., 2007). Thus, there is moderate quality evidence of short to intermediate term
efficacy. Studies with follow-up to one year mostly found worse outcomes in the injection
group or tends towards worse outcomes than physical therapy or a “wait and see” approach
(see Figure 7) (Hay et al., 1999, Lewis et al., 2005, Lindenhovius et al., 2008, Nimgade et al.,
2005, Trudel et al., 2004). These longer-term results caused this recommendation to be
downgraded to only “C,” as well as for the indications to quite restrictive. Caution is
warranted for performing these injections and multiple other treatments should be
attempted first. This also provides rationale for no recommendation for or against these
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

116

injections in patients with acute lateral epicondylalgia. One moderate-quality trial reported
glucocorticoid injection using a peppering technique superior to injection alone or
anesthetic with peppering technique (Dogramaci et al., 2009). Studies comparing these
injections with either platelet-rich plasma or autologous blood suggest the
glucocorticosteroid was inferior (Peerbooms et al., 2010, Gosens et al., 2011, Kazemi et al.,
2010, Ozturan et al., 2010). There are no quality trials of adjuvant treatment. One lowquality trial suggested superiority of combining glucocorticosteroid injection with NSAID vs.
NSAID alone at one month (Toker et al., 2008). Injections are invasive, have modest adverse
effects and are low to moderate cost. They are recommended for highly select cases of
lateral epicondylalgia. The one comparative trial of injectable anesthetics found bupivacaine
was superior to lidocaine and persisted to one year, thus well outlasted the expected
duration of anesthesia. Consequently, adjuvant injection with bupivacaine is recommended
(Solveborn et al., 1995).
Evidence
There are 6 high- and 15 moderate-quality RCTs or pseudorandomized controlled trials (one
with two reports) incorporated into this analysis. There are 3 low-quality RCTs in Appendix
1.
GLUCOCORTICOSTEROID INJECTIONS FOR ACUTE EPICONDYLALGIA
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of glucocorticosteroid (“steroid”)
injections for the treatment of acute lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
One high-quality trial found superior results for glucocorticoid compared with saline at 4
weeks, but worse results at 1 year, including more recurrences (Coombes et al., 2013).
Another high-quality trial found similar results over 3 months with the glucocorticoid
outperforming both saline and platelet rich plasma injections (Krogh et al., 2013). Another
high-quality trial found no difference with placebo injections at one month, though data
appear to suggest a trend towards efficacy (Lindenhovius et al., 2008); however, all
moderate-quality trials comparing glucocorticosteroid injection with placebo found short- to
intermediate-term benefits of injection (Hay et al., 1999, Lewis et al., 2005, Price et al.,
1991). Those results were essentially the same as the results that compared injection to no
treatment (“wait and see”) (Smidt et al., 2002, Bisset et al., 2006, Bisset et al., 2009, Tonks
et al., 2007). Thus, there is moderate quality evidence of short to intermediate term
efficacy. Studies with follow-up to one year mostly found worse outcomes in the injection
group or tends towards worse outcomes than physical therapy or a “wait and see” approach
(see Figure 7) (Hay et al., 1999, Lewis et al., 2005, Lindenhovius et al., 2008, Nimgade et al.,
2005, Trudel et al., 2004). These longer-term results caused this recommendation to be
downgraded to only “C,” as well as for the indications to quite restrictive. Caution is
warranted for performing these injections and multiple other treatments should be

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

117

attempted first. This also provides rationale for no recommendation for or against these
injections in patients with acute lateral epicondylalgia. One moderate-quality trial reported
glucocorticoid injection using a peppering technique superior to injection alone or
anesthetic with peppering technique (Dogramaci et al., 2009). Studies comparing these
injections with either platelet-rich plasma or autologous blood suggest the
glucocorticosteroid was inferior (Peerbooms et al., 2010, Gosens et al., 2011, Kazemi et al.,
2010, Ozturan et al., 2010). There are no quality trials of adjuvant treatment. One lowquality trial suggested superiority of combining glucocorticosteroid injection with NSAID vs.
NSAID alone at one month (Toker et al., 2008). Injections are invasive, have modest adverse
effects and are low to moderate cost. They are recommended for highly select cases of
lateral epicondylalgia. The one comparative trial of injectable anesthetics found bupivacaine
was superior to lidocaine and persisted to one year, thus well outlasted the expected
duration of anesthesia. Consequently, adjuvant injection with bupivacaine is recommended
(Solveborn et al., 1995).
Evidence
There are 6 high- and 15 moderate-quality RCTs or pseudorandomized controlled trials (one
with two reports) incorporated into this analysis. There are 3 low-quality RCTs in Appendix
1.
GLUCOCORTICOSTEROID INJECTIONS WITH BUPIVACAINE FOR SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC
EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
Glucocorticosteroid (“steroid”) injections using bupivacaine as an adjunct are recommended
for the treatment of subacute or chronic lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Indications
Subacute or chronic epicondylalgia patients. Patients should have failed to respond
sufficiently to treatment with multiple different NSAIDs (oral and/or topical), exercise,
elbow straps and activity modification. Patients should be cautioned the symptoms
frequently recur after injection. Moderately to severely affected patients are thought to be
better candidates, particularly those thought to be surgical candidates who are attempting
to delay surgery in the hopes that the pain subsides.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
All quality trials have performed 1 injection and assessed the results, rather than performing
additional injections, unless the initial results were unsatisfactory. Most quality trials that
described the injection techniques utilized the most tender point (Hay et al., 1999, Lewis et
al., 2005, Verhaar et al., 1996), although two primarily targeted the tendon origin (Haker,
1993, Krogh et al., 2013). Medications in these trials varied and included
methylprednisolone 20mg (Hay et al., 1999, Lewis et al., 2005); triamcinolone acetonide

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

118

10mg (Smidt et al., 2002, Bisset et al., 2006, Bisset et al., 2009, Price et al., 1991, Solveborn
et al., 1995), 20mg (Price et al., 1991); triamcinolone acetate (Verhaar et al., 1996);
hydrocortisone 25mg (Price et al., 1991); betamethasone 6mg (Newcomer et al., 2001);
triamcinolone 0. 2mg (Haker, 1993); and triamcinolone 40mg (Krogh et al., 2013). The one
comparative trial suggested triamcinolone 10mg was superior to hydrocortisone 25mg
(Price et al., 1991). Trials have combined these injections with injectable anesthetics (e.g., 0.
5 to 2. 0 mL 1% lidocaine) (Hay et al., 1999, Lewis et al., 2005, Price et al., 1991, Verhaar et
al., 1996); 1. 0mL 2% lidocaine; 1% lignocaine (Coombes et al., 2013); and 4mL 0. 25%
bupivacaine (Newcomer et al., 2001). The one comparative trial suggested bupivacaine was
superior to lidocaine, and far outlasted the expected duration of anesthesia (Solveborn et
al., 1995). There also is some preliminary evidence that either dry needling or a multiple
puncture technique (“peppering”) may be effective, although none with a true control
group for the technique (Stenhouse G, 2013, Uygur E, 2017, Krogh et al., 2013, Altay et al.,
2002, Dogramaci et al., 2009).
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, intolerance, lack of efficacy or non-compliance. Lack of response should
result in reassessment of the diagnosis. Generally, there is an inclination to not use more
than approximately 3 glucocorticoid injections in any one location for one episode.
However, there is no evidence that there is or is not a limit on the number of injections
either for an episode or for a lifetime. Subsequent injections should be supported by either
objective improvement or utilization of a different technique or location for the injection(s).
Rationale
One high-quality trial found superior results for glucocorticoid compared with saline at 4
weeks, but worse results at 1 year, including more recurrences (Coombes et al., 2013).
Another high-quality trial found similar results over 3 months with the glucocorticoid
outperforming both saline and platelet rich plasma injections (Krogh et al., 2013). Another
high-quality trial found no difference with placebo injections at one month, though data
appear to suggest a trend towards efficacy (Lindenhovius et al., 2008); however, all
moderate-quality trials comparing glucocorticosteroid injection with placebo found short- to
intermediate-term benefits of injection (Hay et al., 1999, Lewis et al., 2005, Price et al.,
1991). Those results were essentially the same as the results that compared injection to no
treatment (“wait and see”) (Smidt et al., 2002, Bisset et al., 2006, Bisset et al., 2009, Tonks
et al., 2007). Thus, there is moderate quality evidence of short to intermediate term
efficacy. Studies with follow-up to one year mostly found worse outcomes in the injection
group or tends towards worse outcomes than physical therapy or a “wait and see” approach
(see Figure 7) (Hay et al., 1999, Lewis et al., 2005, Lindenhovius et al., 2008, Nimgade et al.,
2005, Trudel et al., 2004). These longer-term results caused this recommendation to be
downgraded to only “C,” as well as for the indications to quite restrictive. Caution is
warranted for performing these injections and multiple other treatments should be
attempted first. This also provides rationale for no recommendation for or against these
injections in patients with acute lateral epicondylalgia. One moderate-quality trial reported
glucocorticoid injection using a peppering technique superior to injection alone or
anesthetic with peppering technique (Dogramaci et al., 2009). Studies comparing these
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

119

injections with either platelet-rich plasma or autologous blood suggest the
glucocorticosteroid was inferior (Peerbooms et al., 2010, Gosens et al., 2011, Kazemi et al.,
2010, Ozturan et al., 2010). There are no quality trials of adjuvant treatment. One lowquality trial suggested superiority of combining glucocorticosteroid injection with NSAID vs.
NSAID alone at one month (Toker et al., 2008). Injections are invasive, have modest adverse
effects and are low to moderate cost. They are recommended for highly select cases of
lateral epicondylalgia. The one comparative trial of injectable anesthetics found bupivacaine
was superior to lidocaine and persisted to one year, thus well outlasted the expected
duration of anesthesia. Consequently, adjuvant injection with bupivacaine is recommended
(Solveborn et al., 1995).
Evidence
There are 6 high- and 15 moderate-quality RCTs or pseudorandomized controlled trials (one
with two reports) incorporated into this analysis. There are 3 low-quality RCTs in Appendix
1.
BOTULINUM INJECTIONS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
Not Recommended
Botulinum injections are not recommended for the treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic
lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are 4 high-quality trials comparing botulinum injections with placebo. Three of the
studies suggest short to intermediate term benefits (Wong et al., 2005, Placzek et al., 2007,
Espandar et al., 2010) and one does not (Hayton et al., 2005) while one moderate-quality
trial suggested superiority of glucocorticosteroid injections (Lin et al., 2010). Additionally, no
quality studies with longer term follow-ups are available. Botulinum injections are invasive
and there are reports of fatalities as well as muscle weakness (Wong et al., 2005, Placzek et
al., 2007, Lin et al., 2010, Espandar et al., 2010), thus this intervention has major adverse
effects which would appear to require considerable evidence of longer term efficacy to
warrant. Thus, these injections are not recommended.
Evidence
There are 4 high- and 1 moderate -quality RCTs incorporated into this analysis.
PLATELET-RICH PLASMA INJECTIONS FOR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
Platelet-rich plasma injections are recommended for the treatment of chronic lateral or
medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

120

Indications
Lateral epicondylalgia lasting at least 6 months, unresponsive or insufficiently responsive to
other treatments including NSAID(s), straps, stretching and strengthening exercises, and at
least one glucocorticosteroids injection (Peerbooms et al., 2010).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Injection of approximately 3mL of platelet-rich plasma buffered with NS plus 8. 4% sodium
bicarbonate plus bupivacaine 0. 5% with epinephrine (1:200,000) and used peppering
technique (Peerbooms et al., 2010).
Rationale
There is one high-quality trial that found a lack of efficacy of platelet-rich plasma (PRP)
injections compared with saline over 3 months. However, its data does not extend to 12
months (Krogh et al., 2013) when other data suggest the greatest benefits are manifested
(Krogh et al., 2013). There are no placebo controlled trials that address autologous blood
(AB) injections for epicondylalgia. One moderate-quality comparative trial suggested
comparable efficacy (Creaney et al., 2011), while another trial suggested modest superiority
of PRP (Thanasas et al., 2011).
There is one high -quality trial comparing platelet-rich plasma with glucocorticosteroids
(Peerbooms et al., 2010, Gosens et al., 2011) and suggested superiority of the PRP injection
lasting at least 2 years (Gosens et al., 2011). One moderate-quality quasi-randomized trial
suggested superiority of AB injections compared with glucocorticoid injections (Kazemi et
al., 2010), and another moderate though lower quality trial suggested inferiority of AB to
glucocorticoid injections at 4 weeks, but not over one year when AB was superior (Ozturan
et al., 2010). These injections are invasive, have adverse effects, and are costly, but appear
effective for select patients and are thus recommended for chronic epicondylalgia refractory
to other treatments.
Evidence
There are 2 high (one with 2 reports) and 2 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated into this
analysis for platelet-rich plasma injections. There are 3 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated
into this analysis for autologous blood injections.
AUTOLOGOUS BLOOD INJECTIONS FOR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
Autologous blood injections are recommended for the treatment of chronic lateral or
medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

121

Indications
Lateral epicondylalgia lasting at least 6 months, unresponsive or insufficiently responsive to
other treatments including NSAIDs, straps, stretching and strengthening exercises, and at
least one glucocorticosteroids injection (Peerbooms et al., 2010).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Injection of approximately 3mL of platelet-rich plasma buffered with NS plus 8. 4% sodium
bicarbonate plus bupivacaine 0. 5% with epinephrine (1:200,000) and used peppering
technique (Peerbooms et al., 2010).
Rationale
There is one high-quality trial that found a lack of efficacy of platelet-rich plasma (PRP)
injections compared with saline over 3 months. However, its data does not extend to 12
months (Krogh et al., 2013) when other data suggest the greatest benefits are manifested
(Krogh et al., 2013). There are no placebo controlled trials that address autologous blood
(AB) injections for epicondylalgia. One moderate-quality comparative trial suggested
comparable efficacy (Creaney et al., 2011), while another trial suggested modest superiority
of PRP (Thanasas et al., 2011). There is one high -quality trial comparing platelet-rich plasma
with glucocorticosteroids (Peerbooms et al., 2010, Gosens et al., 2011) and suggested
superiority of the PRP injection lasting at least 2 years (Gosens et al., 2011). One moderatequality quasi-randomized trial suggested superiority of AB injections compared with
glucocorticoid injections (Kazemi et al., 2010), and another moderate though lower quality
trial suggested inferiority of AB to glucocorticoid injections at 4 weeks, but not over one
year when AB was superior (Ozturan et al., 2010). These injections are invasive, have
adverse effects, and are costly, but appear effective for select patients and are thus
recommended for chronic epicondylalgia refractory to other treatments.
Evidence
There are 2 high (one with 2 reports) and 2 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated into this
analysis for platelet-rich plasma injections. There are 3 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated
into this analysis for autologous blood injections.
PLATELET-RICH PLASMA FOR ACUTE OR SUBACUTE EPICONDYLALGIA
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of platelet-rich plasma for the treatment
of acute or subacute lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

122

There is one high-quality trial that found a lack of efficacy of platelet-rich plasma (PRP)
injections compared with saline over 3 months. However, its data does not extend to 12
months (Krogh et al., 2013) when other data suggest the greatest benefits are manifested
(Krogh et al., 2013). There are no placebo controlled trials that address autologous blood
(AB) injections for epicondylalgia. One moderate-quality comparative trial suggested
comparable efficacy (Creaney et al., 2011), while another trial suggested modest superiority
of PRP (Thanasas et al., 2011). There is one high -quality trial comparing platelet-rich plasma
with glucocorticosteroids (Peerbooms et al., 2010, Gosens et al., 2011) and suggested
superiority of the PRP injection lasting at least 2 years (Gosens et al., 2011). One moderatequality quasi-randomized trial suggested superiority of AB injections compared with
glucocorticoid injections (Kazemi et al., 2010), and another moderate though lower quality
trial suggested inferiority of AB to glucocorticoid injections at 4 weeks, but not over one
year when AB was superior (Ozturan et al., 2010). These injections are invasive, have
adverse effects, and are costly, but appear effective for select patients and are thus
recommended for chronic epicondylalgia refractory to other treatments.
Evidence
There are 2 high (one with 2 reports) and 2 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated into this
analysis for platelet-rich plasma injections. There are 3 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated
into this analysis for autologous blood injections.
AUTOLOGOUS BLOOD INJECTIONS FOR ACUTE OR SUBACUTE LATERAL EPICONDYLALGIA
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of autologous blood injections for the
treatment of acute or subacute lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There is one high-quality trial that found a lack of efficacy of platelet-rich plasma (PRP)
injections compared with saline over 3 months. However, its data does not extend to 12
months (Krogh et al., 2013) when other data suggest the greatest benefits are manifested
(Krogh et al., 2013). There are no placebo controlled trials that address autologous blood
(AB) injections for epicondylalgia. One moderate-quality comparative trial suggested
comparable efficacy (Creaney et al., 2011), while another trial suggested modest superiority
of PRP (Thanasas et al., 2011). There is one high -quality trial comparing platelet-rich plasma
with glucocorticosteroids (Peerbooms et al., 2010, Gosens et al., 2011) and suggested
superiority of the PRP injection lasting at least 2 years (Gosens et al., 2011). One moderatequality quasi-randomized trial suggested superiority of AB injections compared with
glucocorticoid injections (Kazemi et al., 2010), and another moderate though lower quality
trial suggested inferiority of AB to glucocorticoid injections at 4 weeks, but not over one
year when AB was superior (Ozturan et al., 2010). These injections are invasive, have
adverse effects, and are costly, but appear effective for select patients and are thus
recommended for chronic epicondylalgia refractory to other treatments.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

123

Evidence
There are 2 high (one with 2 reports) and 2 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated into this
analysis for platelet-rich plasma injections. There are 3 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated
into this analysis for autologous blood injections.
POLIDOCANOL INJECTIONS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
Not Recommended
Polidocanol injections are not recommended for the treatment of acute, subacute, or
chronic lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Rationale
There is one moderate-quality, placebo-controlled trial of polidocanol injections (Zeisig et
al., 2008). It found no evidence of short- or intermediate-term benefits; thus, polidocanol
injections are not recommended.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis.
PERIARTICULAR LATERAL ELBOW HYALURONATE AND GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN INJECTIONS
FOR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of periarticular viscosupplementation
(sodium hyaluronate and glycosaminoglycan) injections for the treatment of chronic lateral
or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
One moderate-quality trial using glycosaminoglycan injections found conflicting results of
efficacy for treating chronic lateral epicondylalgia between two participating centers that
are not well explained (Akermark et al., 1995). Another moderate-quality trial suggested
substantial efficacy of sodium hyaluronate in comparison with placebo (Petrella et al.,
2010). These injections are invasive, have low risk of adverse effects, are at least moderately
costly, and results need replicating with quality trials before a recommendation may be
supported.
Evidence
There are 2 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated into this analysis.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

124

PROLOTHERAPY FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of prolotherapy injections for the
treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There is one pilot study of prolotherapy injections, but the data conflict regarding benefit
and a larger sample size is required (Scarpone et al., 2008). There are no quality studies for
the use of percutaneous tenotomy, thus there is no recommendation for these injections.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality pilot study incorporated into this analysis.
SONOGRAPHICALLY GUIDED PERCUTANEOUS TENOTOMY INJECTIONS FOR ACUTE,
SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of sonographically guided percutaneous
tenotomy for the treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic lateral or medial epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There is one pilot study of prolotherapy injections, but the data conflict regarding benefit
and a larger sample size is required (Scarpone et al., 2008). There are no quality studies for
the use of percutaneous tenotomy, thus there is no recommendation for these injections.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality pilot study incorporated into this analysis.

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
EPICONDYLAR RELEASE FOR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
Surgical epicondylar release is recommended for the treatment of chronic lateral or medial
epicondylalgia.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

125

The timing of surgery should be consistent with the degree of functional impairment and
the progression and severity of objective findings. In contrast with severe entrapment
neuropathies, lateral epicondylalgia does not generally produce unequivocally objective
evidence of impairment or severe dysfunction, thus documentation of adequate trials of
non-operative management in spite of compliance with treatment is particularly important
(Leppilahti et al., 2001, Keizer et al., 2002, Meknas et al., 2008).
Surgical indications require both a confirmed diagnosis and surgical considerations.
A confirmed diagnosis of lateral epicondylalgia requires all of the following:
●
lateral elbow pain,
●
tenderness over the lateral epicondyle or just distal to the epicondyle, and
●
pain with resisted wrist extension or resisted middle finger extension.
Nonoperative treatments include (there is no requirement to utilize all of these):
●
elbow straps,
●
cock-up wrist braces,
●
topical or oral (non-opioid) analgesics,
●
home exercises and supervised exercise program,
●
heat and/or ice,
●
iontophoresis with either glucocorticosteroids or NSAIDs,
●
ultrasound,
●
glucocorticosteroid injection (Muhammed et al., 1995, Latinovic et al., 2006, Moss et
al., 1983, Celiker et al., 2002)
A confirmed diagnosis of medial epicondylalgia requires all of the following:
●
medial elbow pain,
●
tenderness over the medial epicondyle or just distal to the epicondyle, and
●
pain with resisted wrist flexion.
Nonoperative treatments include (there is no requirement to utilize all of these):
●
elbow straps,
●
topical or oral (non-opioid) analgesics,
●
home exercises and supervised exercise program,
●
heat and/or ice,
●
iontophoresis with either glucocorticosteroids or NSAIDS,
●
ultrasound,
●
glucocorticosteroid injection (Muhammed et al., 1995, Latinovic et al., 2006, Moss et
al., 1983, Celiker et al., 2002).
Surgical considerations include:
●
pain generally for at least 6 months (Muhammed et al., 1995, Latinovic et al., 2006,
Moss et al., 1983, Celiker et al., 2002), although some limited exceptions where as little as 3
months of nonoperative management may be sufficient, and
●
insufficiently responsive to non-operative treatments including NSAIDs, elbow
straps, stretching and strengthening exercises (Muhammed et al., 1995, Latinovic et al.,
2006, Moss et al., 1983, Celiker et al., 2002).
Any of the three main surgical approaches are acceptable pending quality trials to further
direct care (open, percutaneous and arthroscopic).
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

126

Benefits
Improvement and potential resolution of pain.
Harms
Infection, failure to substantially improve occurs in a minority of patients.
Rationale
There are no quality trials with sham surgical procedures, and no quality trials comparing
surgery with a quality rehabilitation program, thus there is insufficient evidence for surgery.
Nevertheless, carefully selected patients appear to do well with surgery. There is one
moderate-quality trial suggesting superior results with a percutaneous release compared
with an open release, including earlier return to work and patient satisfaction (Dunkow et
al., 2004). A moderate-quality trial comparing tenotomy with shockwave therapy found no
significant differences, but may have been underpowered with some trends in favor of
surgery (Radwan et al., 2008). There also is a trial suggesting no differences between
surgery and botulinum injections, although trends of modestly better results with surgery
were present (Keizer et al., 2002). A third moderate-quality trial suggested relatively less
promising results with either surgical procedure for resistant tennis elbow (Leppilahti et al.,
2001). Another study suggested that those treated with open (Nirschl) release surgery
without drilling did better than those who had adjunctive drilling (Khashaba, 2001). Thus,
benefits of less invasive procedures are suggested in these studies. Lateral epicondylar
surgery is invasive, has adverse effects, and is high cost, but lateral epicondylar release is
recommended in select cases. One trial comparing lateral release with microtenotomy
found the recovery to be modestly faster from microtenotomy, thus that procedure is
recommended (Meknas et al., 2008).
Evidence
There are 6 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated into this analysis.
RADIOFREQUENCY MICROTENOTOMY FOR CHRONIC EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
Radiofrequency microtenotomy is recommended for the treatment of chronic lateral or
medial epicondylalgia (Meknas et al., 2008).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Rationale
There are no quality trials with sham surgical procedures, and no quality trials comparing
surgery with a quality rehabilitation program, thus there is insufficient evidence for surgery.
Nevertheless, carefully selected patients appear to do well with surgery. There is one

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

127

moderate-quality trial suggesting superior results with a percutaneous release compared
with an open release, including earlier return to work and patient satisfaction (Dunkow et
al., 2004). A moderate-quality trial comparing tenotomy with shockwave therapy found no
significant differences, but may have been underpowered with some trends in favor of
surgery (Radwan et al., 2008). There also is a trial suggesting no differences between
surgery and botulinum injections, although trends of modestly better results with surgery
were present (Keizer et al., 2002). A third moderate-quality trial suggested relatively less
promising results with either surgical procedure for resistant tennis elbow (Leppilahti et al.,
2001). Another study suggested that those treated with open (Nirschl) release surgery
without drilling did better than those who had adjunctive drilling (Khashaba, 2001). Thus,
benefits of less invasive procedures are suggested in these studies. Lateral epicondylar
surgery is invasive, has adverse effects, and is high cost, but lateral epicondylar release is
recommended in select cases. One trial comparing lateral release with microtenotomy
found the recovery to be modestly faster from microtenotomy, thus that procedure is
recommended (Meknas et al., 2008).
Evidence
There are 6 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated into this analysis.

REHABILITATION PROGRAMS
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC ELBOW
MSDS
Recommended
Return-to-work programs are recommended for treatment of subacute or chronic elbow
MSDs, particularly patients with significant lost time.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

128

RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SEVERE ELBOW MSDS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against return-to-work programs for acute, severe elbow
MSDs.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis (see Low Back Disorders and
Chronic Pain guidelines for additional studies)
EDUCATION FOR ELBOW DISORDERS
Recommended
Education is recommended for patients with elbow disorders.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Frequency/Dose/Duration
One or two appointments for educational purposes. Additional appointments may be
needed if education is combined with occupational or physical therapy treatments. Followup educational visit(s) for more severe disorders as part of a progression towards normal
functional use is sometimes helpful.
Rationale
There are no quality studies specifically evaluating efficacy of patient education for utility or
necessity in treatment of elbow disorders. Yet, for many disorders (e.g., relationship
between elbow hyperflexion and ulnar neuropathies, cast management) education appears
essential. Some clinicians accomplish this in the course of extended patient visits, while
others routinely refer patients to an occupational or physical therapist for education.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

129

Regardless of the approach, a few appointments for educational purposes are
recommended for select patients. The number of appointments is dependent on the
diagnosis, severity of the condition, and co-existing conditions. Although education is
usually incorporated as part of the overall treatment plan, an additional 1 or 2
appointments for purely educational purposes may be helpful midway through a treatment
course for the more severely affected patient. In addition, education is low cost and this is
recommended.
WORK RESTRICTIONS FOR TREATMENT OF EPICONDYLALGIA
Recommended
For patients with medial or lateral epicondylalgia, it is recommended that their work be
restricted to those tasks that do not involve high-force stereotypical hand gripping or
pinching or the use of high-amplitude vibrating hand-held tools
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Select patients with combined forceful and repeated stereotypical use of the hands.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution, lack of improvement, or desire of the patient to remove limitations.
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating workplace restrictions for treatment of
epicondylalgia. One trial included “rest” as a treatment arm and failed to find efficacy of rest
(Lundeberg et al., 1988). Thus, whether patients improve more quickly with activity
limitations has not been proven. There are trials that have included ergonomic advice as a
co-intervention, although the advice is usually simply avoiding aggravating activities (Smidt
et al., 2002). However, based on available evidence associating combined forceful and
repeated, stereotypical use of the hands with epicondylalgia, work restrictions are
recommended to treat select patients. These types of jobs involve a minority of patients
with epicondylalgia. Restrictions are not invasive, likely have few adverse effects, and may
be moderate to high cost depending on length of time they are in place.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis

PROGNOSIS
Some physicians place work restrictions on patients with epicondylalgia while others do not.
There is no quality evidence to suggest that restrictions are required, yet there are widely
believed to be some activities that may prolong or perpetuate symptoms of lateral
epicondylalgia. Careful advice regarding maximizing activities within the limits of symptoms

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

130

is believed to be important. Activities that increase stress on the wrist’s extensor
mechanism, which originates at the elbow, tend to aggravate symptoms. Consequently,
consideration may be given to restrictions on forceful use, lifting, and repetitive flexion or
extension following the onset of epicondylalgia. Workstation modifications to reduce the
force on the elbow are believed to be important in resolving the problem in cases where the
occupational tasks materially contribute. Understanding the worksite and the employer’s
willingness to and the feasibility of modifying the workstation may be important to maintain
the employee at work and/or minimize disability time.

FOLLOW-UP CARE
Patients with epicondylalgia should generally have a follow-up visit in approximately 1 to 2
weeks to monitor medication use, splint use, activity modifications, and results of treatment
to date. Less frequent follow-ups may be needed as patients improve, although more
frequent follow-up is generally required if workplace limitations have been implemented.

JOB ANALYSIS
Analysis of jobs for risk of lateral epicondylalgia currently parallels that of carpal tunnel
syndrome as the job evaluation methods are largely comparable if not identical in most
cases and there is a lack of strong or moderate evidence the risks differ for these disorders.
The sole exception, the potential for repeated pronation/supination cycles to produce
lateral epicondylalgia, is an additional, theoretical ergonomic evaluation consideration. In
certain cases, it may be desirable to conduct an ergonomic analysis of the activities that may
be contributing to the symptoms. A broad range of ergonomic surveys and instruments is
available for estimating duration of hand intensive activities, grasp repetition rates, pinch
force, part or tool weights, reach distance, frequency of motion, wrist and hand postures, as
well as psychological factors such as organizational relationships and job satisfaction (332)
(e.g., the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists Threshold Limit Value
for Hand Activity (333), Strain Index (334), Motion Time Measurement Analysis.) Such detailed
measures may be necessary or useful for modifying activity, for redesigning the workstation,
or for recommending organizational and management initiatives. These situations may call
for referral to certified professional ergonomists or a human factors engineer either through
the patient or the employer. Some occupational therapists, physical therapists, and other
professionals also may have appropriate credentials and experiences to accomplish these
evaluations. Evaluation of jobs for risk of medial epicondylalgia is currently believed to be
essentially the same as for lateral epicondylalgia as quality evidence for medial
epicondylalgia is lacking.

OLECRANON BURSITIS
OVERVIEW
Bursae are sacks with a small amount of fluid that are usually located between structures
that move and provide a cushion to reduce friction between the two moving body parts
(e.g., between muscle and bone or between bone and overlying skin). Bursitis occurs when
the bursae become inflamed and irritated. Olecranon bursitis is a common condition
involving an irritated bursa between the olecranon process and overlying dermis. Causal
mechanisms are somewhat unclear, but thought to include direct trauma over the
olecranon such as bumping or falling on the elbow or leaning on the olecranon, particularly
if this is unaccustomed practice. Treatment of olecranon bursitis has most commonly
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

131

included avoidance of inciting events, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
drainage/aspiration, a glucocorticosteroid injection, or surgery. Surgical drainage and
antibiotics are required if the bursa becomes infected.

RISK AND CAUSATION
WORK RELATEDNESS
Olecranon bursitis is considered work-related when there is a discrete traumatic event,
including falls onto or bumps against the olecranon. Development of olecranon bursitis after
unaccustomed leaning on the elbow is also thought to be work-related. There are no quality
studies to associate routine work activities with the development of this bursitis.

DIAGNOSIS
INITIAL ASSESSMENT
There are no special studies for most cases of olecranon bursitis. If the bursa is thought to
be potentially infected, aspiration of the fluid and analyses including Gram stain and culture
and sensitivity are recommended.
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
Olecranon bursitis is a condition associated with a generally painless effusion of the
olecranon bursa (335,336,337). Acute olecranon bursitis may be slightly warm, but is generally
non-tender or minimally tender. Septic (infected) olecranon bursitis is either a complication
of aseptic olecranon bursitis or a direct consequence of trauma (335). Generally, to be a
complication of aseptic olecranon, bursitis also requires introduction of organisms through
the skin, such as abraded skin or an injection, although systemic seeding may also occur.
Signs include swelling, pain, tenderness, and pain on range of motion (335,336,337). Bursitis due
to crystal arthropathies also tend to present with findings similar to those of septic bursitis
(336)
.

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
ASPIRATION
FLUID ASPIRATION AND ANALYSES FOR OLECRANON BURSITIS
Recommended
Aspiration of the fluid and analyses including Gram stain and culture and sensitivity are
recommended to determine infection for olecranon bursitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

X-RAYS
X-RAYS FOR OLECRANON BURSITIS
Recommended
X-rays are recommended to rule out osteomyelitis or joint effusion in cases of significant
septic olecranon bursitis.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

132

Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
OVERVIEW
Most patients with olecranon bursitis are treated with soft elbow padding, support or an
ace wrap, are instructed to avoid elbow pressure, and require no further care other than
monitoring to assure resolution.
Some patients with olecranon bursitis have been treated with NSAIDs, particularly if there is
some accompanying discomfort.
Aspiration of the swollen bursa has been used for diagnosing septic olecranon bursitis, or if
it is thought to be potentially infected (336,337,338). Aspiration has been reported in a lowquality study to have fewer complications than glucocorticosteroid injection (338).
Injection with a glucocorticosteroid (typically doses of methylprednisolone approximately 20
to 40mg or equivalent), often accompanied by aspiration, is widely used for aseptic
olecranon bursitis (338,339).
Surgery has been widely used to treat olecranon bursitis that has not responded to activity
modifications and injections (337).

ACTIVITY MODIFICATION AND EXERCISE
MODIFYING ACTIVITIES TO AVOID DIRECT PRESSURE OVER THE OLECRANON
Recommended
Modifying activities to avoid direct pressure over the olecranon and allowing time to
reabsorb the fluid are recommended.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality trials. Most patients appear to resolve with non-invasive options
including avoiding pressure on the olecranon. Activity modification is not invasive, has low
or no adverse effects, is low cost and is recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of modifying activities for olecranon bursitis.

MEDICATIONS
NSAIDS FOR OLECRANON BURSITIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of NSAIDs for the treatment of olecranon
bursitis.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

133

Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There is one moderate quality trial that included arms comparing naproxen with placebo
and failed to show efficacy (Smith et al., 1989). However, the arms comparing
glucocorticosteroid injection with naproxen or placebo trended towards better results with
the NSAID. Thus, as there is no clear quality evidence that NSAIDs alter the clinical course,
there is no recommendation for or against their use for olecranon bursitis. The threshold for
a trial of these medications is likely generally low.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate -quality RCT incorporated into this analysis.

DEVICES
SOFT PADDING FOR OLECRANON BURSITIS
Recommended
Soft padding is recommended for olecranon bursitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating these modifications for treatment of olecranon
bursitis. Most patients appear to resolve with non-invasive options. Soft padding, soft elbow
supports, and ace wraps are not invasive, have few adverse effects, are low cost, and are
recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of soft padding, soft elbow supports, or ace
wraps for olecranon bursitis.
SOFT ELBOW SUPPORTS FOR OLECRANON BURSITIS
Recommended
Soft elbow supports are recommended for olecranon bursitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating these modifications for treatment of olecranon
bursitis. Most patients appear to resolve with non-invasive options. Soft padding, soft elbow

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

134

supports, and ace wraps are not invasive, have few adverse effects, are low cost, and are
recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of soft padding, soft elbow supports, or ace
wraps for olecranon bursitis.
ACE WRAPS FOR OLECRANON BURSITIS
Recommended
Ace wraps are recommended for olecranon bursitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating these modifications for treatment of olecranon
bursitis. Most patients appear to resolve with non-invasive options. Soft padding, soft elbow
supports, and ace wraps are not invasive, have few adverse effects, are low cost, and are
recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of soft padding, soft elbow supports, or ace
wraps for olecranon bursitis.

INJECTION THERAPIES
GLUCOCORTICOSTEROID INJECTIONS FOR OLECRANON BURSITIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of glucocorticosteroid injections for the
treatment of olecranon bursitis. This may be a reasonable option for patients who are failing
to resolve prior to consideration of surgery.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There is one moderate quality trial evaluating the use of glucocorticosteroid injections to
treat olecranon bursitis (Smith et al., 1989). That study suggested injection with
glucocorticosteroid sped resolution of the condition, and trended toward superior results if
the injection was combined with oral naproxen rather than placebo. However, another
study reported a 12% risk of septic complications and an RCT is generally underpowered to
detect infectious complications. While the quality trial indicates faster resolution, the risk of
infectious complications underscore caution about glucocorticoid injections as there is a
potential to create a septic bursitis which then often requires surgical drainage. If
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

135

attempted, these injections appear to be reserved for those thought to not be infected and
not resolving with activity modifications and observation. If attempted, generally only one
aspiration/injection is performed followed by careful observation. Some physicians aspirate
and then inject, while others only inject the steroid. If the bursitis is not satisfactorily
resolved, a second aspiration/injection is often attempted usually not sooner than 3 to 4
weeks later. The single quality trial used methylprednisolone acetate 20 mg (Smith et al.,
1989). Aspirated fluid should be sent at least once for studies including crystals (light
polarizing microscopy), Gram stain, culture and sensitivity and complete cell count of the
aspirated fluid are performed. Glucocorticosteroid injection is invasive, has relatively low
adverse effects although it can introduce an infection if one is not present, and is
moderately costly, and is recommended in those cases not trending towards resolution.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis.

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
SURGICAL DRAINAGE FOR OLECRANON BURSITIS
Recommended
Surgical drainage is recommended for treatment of olecranon bursitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Olecranon bursitis that is either infected, clinically thought to be infected, or not infected
but present for at least approximately 6 to 8 weeks without trending towards resolution
while being treated with soft padding and activity modifications above.
Rationale
There are no quality trials. Surgical drainage of a swollen olecranon bursa has been
successfully used for treatment of olecranon bursitis. As it is not without potential
complications, however, it is recommended to be reserved for select cases either involving
infection or failure to respond to an adequate trial of non-operative measures. Surgical
drainage is invasive, has modest adverse effects for this particular surgery, is moderate to
high cost, but is recommended in those cases not trending towards resolution or which are
thought to be infected.
SURGICAL RESECTION FOR CHRONIC OLECRANON BURSITIS
Recommended
Surgical resection of the bursa is recommended for chronic olecranon bursitis with recurrent
drainage.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

136

Indications
Olecranon bursitis with recurrent drainage.
Rationale
There are no quality trials. Surgical drainage of a swollen olecranon bursa has been
successfully used for treatment of olecranon bursitis. As it is not without potential
complications, however, it is recommended to be reserved for select cases either involving
infection or failure to respond to an adequate trial of non-operative measures. Surgical
drainage is invasive, has modest adverse effects for this particular surgery, is moderate to
high cost, but is recommended in those cases not trending towards resolution or which are
thought to be infected.
ASPIRATION FOR INFECTED BURSA
Recommended
Aspiration is recommended for a clinically infected or questionably infected bursa.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
Aspiration has been used for diagnosis, particularly when combined with Gram stain, culture
and sensitivity, and complete cell count of the aspirated fluid are performed. Crystal
examination (light polarizing microscopy) should also be performed at least once on the
aspirated fluid. Aspiration of a bursa is invasive, has relatively low adverse effects although
it can introduce an infection if one is not present, and is low to moderate cost, but is
recommended for diagnosis and planning of treatment.
Evidence
There is 1 low-quality RCT in Appendix 1.

REHABILITATION
EDUCATION FOR ELBOW DISORDERS
Recommended
Education is recommended for patients with elbow disorders.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Frequency/Dose/Duration
One or two appointments for educational purposes. Additional appointments may be
needed if education is combined with occupational or physical therapy treatments. FollowCopyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

137

up educational visit(s) for more severe disorders as part of a progression towards normal
functional use is sometimes helpful.
Rationale
There are no quality studies specifically evaluating efficacy of patient education for utility or
necessity in treatment of elbow disorders. Yet, for many disorders (e.g., relationship
between elbow hyperflexion and ulnar neuropathies, cast management) education appears
essential. Some clinicians accomplish this in the course of extended patient visits, while
others routinely refer patients to an occupational or physical therapist for education.
Regardless of the approach, a few appointments for educational purposes are
recommended for select patients. The number of appointments is dependent on the
diagnosis, severity of the condition, and co-existing conditions. Although education is
usually incorporated as part of the overall treatment plan, an additional 1 or 2
appointments for purely educational purposes may be helpful midway through a treatment
course for the more severely affected patient. In addition, education is low cost and this is
recommended.
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SEVERE ELBOW MSDS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against return-to-work programs for acute, severe elbow
MSDs.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis (see Low Back Disorders and
Chronic Pain guidelines for additional studies).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

138

RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC ELBOW
MSDS
Recommended
Return-to-work programs are recommended for treatment of subacute or chronic elbow
MSDs, particularly patients with significant lost time.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.

PROGNOSIS
Fractures require work limitations to avoid use of the fractured arm. Functional restrictions
of the affected extremity are limited by an immobilization technique. Activities should be
modified to allow for splinting and immobilization of the forearm. Return to work will likely
be influenced by the patient and clinician's subjective assessment of disability and
perception of job difficulty. It may be helpful to refer the patient to an occupational
therapist to address the appropriate activity modification, compensatory strategies,
adaptive equipment, and environmental modification throughout the period of the patient’s
recovery and rehabilitation. The other injuries may or may not require work limitations
depending on severity of the injury and the task demands. However, moderate to severe
sprains and dislocations likely necessitate splinting and limitations.

JOB ANALYSIS
Job analyses may be beneficial to prevent future occurrences of these types of injuries (e.g.,
machine guarding, icy walkways, tool kickback). Some of these, particularly compartment
syndrome and fractures should generally be analyzed for root cause and potential
remediation, as these injuries are generally viewed as critical incident cases.

PRONATOR SYNDROME
OVERVIEW
Pronator syndrome involves entrapment of the median nerve as it traverses the pronator
muscle in the proximal forearm. The most common causes are fibrotic/fascial
bands* generally within the muscle or muscle hypertrophy. Symptoms include paresthesias
in the median nerve distribution (typically digits 1-3 and radial half of the 4th digit). Pain

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

139

may be present. Nerve conduction studies are normal at the wrist, but abnormal proximally,
as demonstrated by inching technique and/or segmental analysis. Patients are commonly
treated for presumptive CTS. Treatment failure should suggest the possibility of pronator
syndrome. Activity modification and splinting is the initial approach. Surgical release may be
necessary in refractory cases.
Surgical release of the median nerve for pronator syndrome has been performed (340,341,342).
Referral for surgery may be indicated for patients who have red flags of a serious nature
(e.g., compressive neuropathy secondary to acute fracture), or have failed to respond to
non-surgical management including wrist splints. Surgical considerations depend on the
confirmed diagnosis of the presenting symptoms. If surgery is a consideration, counseling
regarding likely outcomes, risks, and benefits, and especially expectations is important. It is
also important to set pre-operative expectations that there is a necessity to adhere to the
rehabilitative exercise regimen and work through post-operative pain. In the post-operative
phase, range-of-motion exercises should involve the elbow, as well as the wrist and
shoulder to avoid frozen shoulder (“adhesive capsulitis”). If there is no clear indication for
surgery, referring the patient to a clinician experienced in non-operative treatment may aid
in formulating a treatment plan.
*Fibrotic tissue is generally considered analogous to scar tissue. It is often a consequence of
penetrating trauma. Fascial bands are a similar type of firm connective tissue; however, they
may occur without trauma. Either may compress a nerve and cause a peripheral
neuropathy.

RISK AND CAUSATION
WORK RELATEDNESS
There are no quality studies of pronator syndrome. Cases are poorly understood and workrelatedness is speculative. Cases occurring secondary to fibrotic bands that are secondary to
work-related trauma are considered work-related. Cases occurring due to pronator
hypertrophy related to high force activities are also typically considered work-related.

DIAGNOSIS
INITIAL ASSESSMENT
Pronator syndrome involves median nerve entrapment under or within the pronator teres
muscle in the proximal forearm (343-347). It causes pain in the flexor forearm and paresthesias
similar to carpal tunnel syndrome, which is the main consideration in the differential
diagnosis. Pronator syndrome is believed to cause nocturnal awakening less frequently than
carpal tunnel syndrome. A confirmatory electrodiagnostic study is helpful and is
recommended [Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)].
There are no quality trials for non-surgical treatments (345). Some of the reported treatments
have included avoiding aggravating activities (343), rest (340,341,348), NSAIDs, and
glucocorticosteroid injections (340,341,343,348). In the absence of quality evidence for treatment
of these radiculopathies, it is recommended that the treatments for ulnar neuropathy at the
elbow be used to infer treatment for median neuropathies (pronator syndrome).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

140

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
ACTIVITY MODIFICATION AND EXERCISE
EXERCISES, MOST PATIENTS WITH PRONATOR SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for exercise for most patients.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
EXERCISES, POSTOPERATIVE PRONATOR SYNDROME OR PATIENTS WITH SIGNIFICANT
DEFICITS
Recommended
Exercise is recommended postoperatively or for patients with significant deficits.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

MEDICATIONS
NSAIDS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR SYNDROME
Not Recommended
NSAIDs are not recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
ACETAMINOPHEN FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR SYNDROME
Not Recommended
Acetaminophen is not recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
NSAIDS FOR POSTOPERATIVE PRONATOR SYNDROME
Recommended
NSAIDs are recommended for postoperative pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
ACETAMINOPHEN FOR POSTOPERATIVE PRONATOR SYNDROME
Recommended
Acetaminophen is recommended for postoperative pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

141

OPIOIDS (ORAL, TRANSDERMAL, AND PARENTERAL, INCLUDING TRAMADOL) FOR ACUTE,
SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR SYNDROME
Not Recommended
Opioids are not recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
OPIOIDS (ORAL, TRANSDERMAL, AND PARENTERAL, INCLUDING TRAMADOL) FOR
POSTOPERATIVE PRONATOR SYNDROME
Recommended
Opioids are recommended for postoperative pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
GLUCOCORTICOSTEROIDS (ORAL OR INJECTIONS) FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC
PRONATOR SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against glucocorticosteroids (oral or injections) for
acute, subacute, or chronic pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
PYRIDOXINE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR SYNDROME
Not Recommended
Pyridoxine is not recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
VITAMINS (OTHER) FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against other vitamins for acute, subacute, or chronic
pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
LIDOCAINE PATCHES FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against lidocaine patches for acute, subacute, or chronic
pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

142

KETAMINE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against ketamine for acute, subacute, or chronic
pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
ANTIEMETICS
See the ACOEM Antiemetics Guideline.

DEVICES
ELBOW SPLINTING FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR SYNDROME
Recommended
Elbow splinting is recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
MAGNETS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR SYNDROME
Not Recommended
Magnets are not recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

ALLIED HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
ACUPUNCTURE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against acupuncture for acute, subacute, or chronic
pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
BIOFEEDBACK FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against biofeedback for acute, subacute, or chronic
pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
MANIPULATION AND MOBILIZATION FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR
SYNDROME
No Recommendation

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

143

There is no recommendation for or against manipulation and mobilization for acute,
subacute, or chronic pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
MASSAGE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against massage for acute, subacute, or chronic
pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
SOFT TISSUE MASSAGE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against soft-tissue massage for acute, subacute, or
chronic pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
IONTOPHORESIS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against iontophoresis for acute, subacute, or chronic
pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
PHONOPHORESIS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against phonophoresis for acute, subacute, or chronic
pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
LOW-LEVEL LASER THERAPY FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR SYNDROME
Not Recommended
Low-level laser therapy is not recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic pronator
syndrome.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
ULTRASOUND FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PRONATOR SYNDROME
Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

144

Ultrasound is recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic pronator syndrome.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

SURGICAL INTERVENTIONS
SURGICAL RELEASE FOR TREATMENT OF SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC FOREARM MEDIAN
NEUROPATHIES, INCLUDING PRONATOR SYNDROME
Recommended
Surgical release is recommended for patients who fail non-operative treatment for subacute
or chronic median neuropathies in the forearm. It is also recommended for patients who
have emergent or urgent indications (e.g., acute compression due to fracture, or
compartment syndrome with unrelenting symptoms of nerve impairment).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Symptoms of median neuropathy in the forearm, and a significant loss of function, as
reflected in significant activity limitations due to the nerve entrapment and that the patient
has failed non-operative care usually for at least 3 to 6 months. Patients should generally
have failed wrist splints, avoidance of aggravating exposures, and full compliance in therapy.
Patients with severe symptoms such as continuous tingling and numbness, progression of
symptoms or functional impairment may be earlier surgical candidates. Many surgeons will
not operate on a patient without a positive electrodiagnostic study. Ideally, the EDS should
include inching technique. The type of surgical procedure selected is dependent on factors
that include the preoperative electrodiagnostic studies, surgeon’s comfort and experience
and surgical anatomy.
Rationale
Quality studies are not available on surgical treatment for median nerve entrapment in the
forearm including pronator syndrome, and there is not evidence of its benefits. If, after at
least 3 to 6 months of conservative treatment, the patient fails to show signs of
improvement, surgery may be a reasonable option if there is unequivocal evidence of
median neuropathy that includes positive electrodiagnostic studies and objective evidence
of loss of function as outlined above. Surgical options for this problem are invasive, have
adverse effects and are high cost. Surgery is recommended for carefully selected patients.

REHABILITATION
EDUCATION FOR ELBOW DISORDERS
Recommended
Education is recommended for patients with elbow disorders.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

145

Frequency/Dose/Duration
One or two appointments for educational purposes. Additional appointments may be
needed if education is combined with occupational or physical therapy treatments. Followup educational visit(s) for more severe disorders as part of a progression towards normal
functional use is sometimes helpful.
Rationale
There are no quality studies specifically evaluating efficacy of patient education for utility or
necessity in treatment of elbow disorders. Yet, for many disorders (e.g., relationship
between elbow hyperflexion and ulnar neuropathies, cast management) education appears
essential. Some clinicians accomplish this in the course of extended patient visits, while
others routinely refer patients to an occupational or physical therapist for education.
Regardless of the approach, a few appointments for educational purposes are
recommended for select patients. The number of appointments is dependent on the
diagnosis, severity of the condition, and co-existing conditions. Although education is
usually incorporated as part of the overall treatment plan, an additional 1 or 2
appointments for purely educational purposes may be helpful midway through a treatment
course for the more severely affected patient. In addition, education is low cost and this is
recommended.
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC ELBOW
MSDS
Recommended
Return-to-work programs are recommended for treatment of subacute or chronic elbow
MSDs, particularly patients with significant lost time.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

146

RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SEVERE ELBOW MSDS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against return-to-work programs for acute, severe elbow
MSDs.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis (see Low Back Disorders and
Chronic Pain guidelines for additional studies)

JOB ANALYSIS
Job analysis methods are unclear. Cases occurring due to pronator hypertrophy related to
high force activities may theoretically benefit from job analyses.

RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT
OVERVIEW
Radial neuropathies occur secondary to entrapments at any point along the nerve. There
are three segments in the area of the elbow prone to radial nerve entrapments, including
the radial tunnel. Symptoms are based on the location of the entrapment, but in general
include sensory and/or motor findings according to the fibers present in the nerve at that
particular location. If the entrapment is sufficiently distal, there will only be sensory findings
and no motor weakness. The most noteworthy sensory location is the dorsum of the first
webspace. The most common motor findings involve wrist and digit extensor weakness.
Pain may be present. Nerve conduction studies demonstrate slowing of nerve conduction as
demonstrated by segmental analysis, with inching technique required for precise
electrodiagnostic localization. Activity modification and wrist splinting are the initial
approach. Surgical release may be necessary in refractory cases.
Radial nerve entrapment, particularly of the posterior interosseous branch of the radial
nerve, causes proximal forearm aching and pain that persists despite presumably effective
treatment (343,344,349-352). It is clinically somewhat difficult to distinguish from non-specific
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

147

forearm and elbow pain, is considered controversial (353,354), and it is sometimes referred to
as “resistant tennis elbow” or “supinator syndrome. ” A relatively rare condition, radial
nerve entrapment is estimated to be approximately 30 to 100 fold less common than carpal
tunnel syndrome (355). There are multiple sites for potential entrapment. Most commonly,
these sites include the extensor carpi radialis brevis origin, fibrous bands overlying the radial
head, radial recurrent arterial fan, and the arcade of Frohse at the entrance to the supinator
muscle (356,357).
A confirmatory electrodiagnostic motor study is helpful (often difficult to obtain) and is
recommended [Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]. There are no quality studies on
which to rely for the treatment of radial neuropathies and there is not evidence of benefits
of the following treatment options. However, these options are low cost, have few adverse
effects, and are not invasive. Thus, while there is insufficient evidence to support their use,
they are recommended.
There are no quality trials for non-surgical treatments. Some of the reported treatments
have included physical therapy and exercise (343,358), and glucocorticosteroid injections (343).
In the absence of quality evidence for treatment of these radiculopathies, it is
recommended that the treatments for ulnar neuropathy at the elbow (summarized below)
be used to infer treatment for radial neuropathies.
Surgical release of the radial nerve has been performed (351,359,360,361). Referral for surgery
may be indicated for patients who have red flags of a serious nature (e.g., compressive
neuropathy secondary to acute fracture), or have failed to respond to non-surgical
management including wrist splints. Surgical considerations depend on the confirmed
diagnosis of the presenting symptoms. If surgery is a consideration, counseling regarding
likely outcomes, risks, and benefits, and especially expectations is important. It is also
important to set pre-operative expectations that there is a necessity to adhere to the
rehabilitative exercise regimen and work through post-operative pain. In the post-operative
phase, range-of-motion exercises should involve the elbow, as well as the wrist and
shoulder to avoid frozen shoulder (“adhesive capsulitis”). If there is no clear indication for
surgery, referring the patient to a clinician experienced in non-operative treatment may aid
in formulating a treatment plan.

RISK AND CAUSATION
WORK RELATEDNESS
There are no quality epidemiological studies of radial tunnel syndrome (362). Some cases
occur due to sequalae of trauma (e.g., scar tissue), thus the mechanism of the trauma
determines whether the radial nerve entrapment is occupational. Other cases are poorly
understood and work-relatedness is speculative.

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
ELECTROMYOGRAPHY
ELECTROMYOGRAPHY FOR DIAGNOSING SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC PERIPHERAL NERVE
ENTRAPMENTS
Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

148

Electrodiagnostic studies are recommended to assist in the diagnosis of subacute or chronic
peripheral nerve entrapments, including ulnar neuropathies, radial neuropathies and
median neuropathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Patients with subacute or chronic paresthesias with or without pain, particularly with
unclear diagnosis. In addition to segmental analysis (e.g., above- versus below-elbow
conduction), patients with peripheral neuropathies in the elbow region should generally
have inching technique performed to localize the entrapment which assists with clinical
management.
Rationale
ED studies are the only unequivocally objective measures of nerve function (Jablecki et al.,
2002, Rempel et al., 1998). However, there are both false-positive and false-negative test
results that demand that the physician understand the pre-test probabilities and be capable
of interpreting the results and placing them in an appropriate clinical context. For example,
ED studies should not be ordered in settings where the clinical history suggests a low
likelihood of nerve entrapment because the probability of a false-positive test result may be
well above 50%. ED studies are primarily of assistance in: 1) identifying an anatomic location
of nerve conduction slowing; 2) identifying objective evidence for alternate diagnostic
considerations (e.g., cervical radiculopathy); and 3) quantifying nerve function to assure the
physician that an operative state such as CTS is present. A survey of 350 records of
electrodiagnostic studies found only 34% compliance with the AAEM guideline (see Table 7)
(Thibault et al., 2005). ED studies are not invasive or minimally invasive (depending on
whether the EMG component is required), have minimal adverse effects, and are high cost.
They are recommended for evaluation of select cases to assist in confirming peripheral
nerve entrapments such as pronator syndrome, ulnar neuropathies at the elbow and radial
neuropathies.

ELECTRODIAGNOSTIC STUDIES
ELECTRODIAGNOSTIC STUDIES FOR DIAGNOSIS AND PRE-OPERATIVE ASSESSMENT OF
PERIPHERAL NERVE ENTRAPMENTS
Recommended
Quality electrodiagnostic studies (see above) are recommended to assist in securing a firm
diagnosis for those patients without a clear diagnosis. ED studies are also recommended as
one of two methods to attempt to objectively secure a diagnosis prior to surgical release.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

149

ED studies are the only unequivocally objective measures of nerve function (Jablecki et al.,
2002, Rempel et al., 1998). However, there are both false-positive and false-negative test
results that demand that the physician understand the pre-test probabilities and be capable
of interpreting the results and placing them in an appropriate clinical context. For example,
ED studies should not be ordered in settings where the clinical history suggests a low
likelihood of nerve entrapment because the probability of a false-positive test result may be
well above 50%. ED studies are primarily of assistance in: 1) identifying an anatomic location
of nerve conduction slowing; 2) identifying objective evidence for alternate diagnostic
considerations (e.g., cervical radiculopathy); and 3) quantifying nerve function to assure the
physician that an operative state such as CTS is present. A survey of 350 records of
electrodiagnostic studies found only 34% compliance with the AAEM guideline (see Table 7)
(Thibault et al., 2005). ED studies are not invasive or minimally invasive (depending on
whether the EMG component is required), have minimal adverse effects, and are high cost.
They are recommended for evaluation of select cases to assist in confirming peripheral
nerve entrapments such as pronator syndrome, ulnar neuropathies at the elbow and radial
neuropathies.
ELECTRODIAGNOSTIC STUDIES FOR INITIAL EVALUATION OF PATIENTS SUSPECTED OF
HAVING A PERIPHERAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT
Not Recommended
Electrodiagnostic studies are not recommended for initial evaluation of most patients as it
does not change the management of the condition.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
ED studies are the only unequivocally objective measures of nerve function (Jablecki et al.,
2002, Rempel et al., 1998). However, there are both false-positive and false-negative test
results that demand that the physician understand the pre-test probabilities and be capable
of interpreting the results and placing them in an appropriate clinical context. For example,
ED studies should not be ordered in settings where the clinical history suggests a low
likelihood of nerve entrapment because the probability of a false-positive test result may be
well above 50%. ED studies are primarily of assistance in: 1) identifying an anatomic location
of nerve conduction slowing; 2) identifying objective evidence for alternate diagnostic
considerations (e.g., cervical radiculopathy); and 3) quantifying nerve function to assure the
physician that an operative state such as CTS is present. A survey of 350 records of
electrodiagnostic studies found only 34% compliance with the AAEM guideline (see Table 7)
(Thibault et al., 2005). ED studies are not invasive or minimally invasive (depending on
whether the EMG component is required), have minimal adverse effects, and are high cost.
They are recommended for evaluation of select cases to assist in confirming peripheral
nerve entrapments such as pronator syndrome, ulnar neuropathies at the elbow and radial
neuropathies.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

150

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
ACTIVITY MODIFICATION AND EXERCISE
EXERCISE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT (INCLUDING
RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
Not Recommended
Exercise is not recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic radial nerve entrapment
(including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
EXERCISE FOR POSTOPERATIVE RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT (INCLUDING RADIAL TUNNEL
SYNDROME) OR PATIENTS WITH SIGNIFICANT DEFICITS
Recommended
Exercise is recommended for postoperative radial nerve entrapment (including radial tunnel
syndrome), as well as for patients with significant deficits.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

MEDICATIONS
NSAIDS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT (INCLUDING
RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
Not Recommended
NSAIDs are not recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic radial nerve entrapment
(including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
ACETAMINOPHEN FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT
(INCLUDING RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
Not Recommended
Acetaminophen is not recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic radial nerve
entrapment (including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
NSAIDS FOR POSTOPERATIVE RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT (INCLUDING RADIAL TUNNEL
SYNDROME)
Recommended
NSAIDs are recommended for postoperative radial nerve entrapment (including radial
tunnel syndrome).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

151

Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
ACETAMINOPHEN FOR POSTOPERATIVE RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT (INCLUDING RADIAL
TUNNEL SYNDROME)
Recommended
Acetaminophen is recommended for postoperative radial nerve entrapment (including
radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
GLUCOCORTICOSTEROIDS (ORAL OR INJECTIONS) FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC
RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT (INCLUDING RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against glucocorticosteroids (oral or injections) for
acute, subacute, or chronic radial nerve entrapment (including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
PYRIDOXINE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT
(INCLUDING RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
Not Recommended
Pyridoxine is not recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic radial nerve entrapment
(including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
VITAMINS (OTHER) FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT
(INCLUDING RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against other vitamins for acute, subacute, or chronic
radial nerve entrapment (including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
LIDOCAINE PATCHES FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT
(INCLUDING RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against lidocaine patches for acute, subacute, or chronic
radial nerve entrapment (including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

152

KETAMINE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT
(INCLUDING RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against ketamine for acute, subacute, or chronic radial
nerve entrapment (including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
ANTIEMETICS
See the ACOEM Antiemetics Guideline.

DEVICES
MAGNETS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT (INCLUDING
RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
Not Recommended
Magnets are not recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic radial nerve entrapment
(including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
ELBOW AND WRIST SPLINTING FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE
ENTRAPMENT (INCLUDING RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
Recommended
Elbow and wrist splinting are recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic radial nerve
entrapment (including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)

ALLIED HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
ACUPUNCTURE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT
(INCLUDING RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against acupuncture for acute, subacute, or chronic
radial nerve entrapment (including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
BIOFEEDBACK FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT
(INCLUDING RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
No Recommendation

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

153

There is no recommendation for or against biofeedback for acute, subacute, or chronic
radial nerve entrapment (including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
MANIPULATION AND MOBILIZATION FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE
ENTRAPMENT (INCLUDING RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against manipulation or mobilization for acute,
subacute, or chronic radial nerve entrapment (including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
MASSAGE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT (INCLUDING
RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against massage for acute, subacute, or chronic radial
nerve entrapment (including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
SOFT TISSUE MASSAGE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE
ENTRAPMENT (INCLUDING RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against soft-tissue massage for acute, subacute, or
chronic radial nerve entrapment (including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
IONTOPHORESIS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT
(INCLUDING RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against iontophoresis for acute, subacute, or chronic
radial nerve entrapment (including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
PHONOPHORESIS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT
(INCLUDING RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against photophoresis (oral or injections) for acute,
subacute, or chronic radial nerve entrapment (including radial tunnel syndrome).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

154

Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
LOW-LEVEL LASER THERAPY FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE
ENTRAPMENT (INCLUDING RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
Not Recommended
Low-level laser therapy is not recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic radial nerve
entrapment (including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
ULTRASOUND FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC RADIAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT
(INCLUDING RADIAL TUNNEL SYNDROME)
Recommended
Ultrasound is recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic radial nerve entrapment
(including radial tunnel syndrome).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Surgical release of the radial nerve has been performed (351,359,360,361). Referral for surgery
may be indicated for patients who have red flags of a serious nature (e.g., compressive
neuropathy secondary to acute fracture), or have failed to respond to non-surgical
management including wrist splints. Surgical considerations depend on the confirmed
diagnosis of the presenting symptoms. If surgery is a consideration, counseling regarding
likely outcomes, risks, and benefits, and especially expectations is important. It is also
important to set pre-operative expectations that there is a necessity to adhere to the
rehabilitative exercise regimen and work through post-operative pain. In the post-operative
phase, range-of-motion exercises should involve the elbow, as well as the wrist and
shoulder to avoid frozen shoulder (“adhesive capsulitis”). If there is no clear indication for
surgery, referring the patient to a clinician experienced in non-operative treatment may aid
in formulating a treatment plan.
SURGICAL RELEASE FOR TREATMENT OF SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC RADIAL NEUROPATHIES
Recommended
Surgical release is recommended for patients who fail non-operative treatment for subacute
or chronic radial neuropathies or patients who have emergent or urgent indications (e.g.,
acute compression due to fracture, or compartment syndrome with unrelenting symptoms
of nerve impairment).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Surgical indications require all of the following:
●
confirmed clinical diagnosis,
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

155

●
nonoperative treatment, and
●
surgical considerations.
A presumptive diagnosis requires pain and tenderness in the proximal lateral forearm, distal
to the lateral epicondyle which may or may not be accompanied by paresthesias depending
on the location of the neurological compression.
A confirmed diagnosis also includes at least one of:
●
confirmatory electrodiagnostic testing interpreted as consistent with radial
neuropathy that generally includes segmental analysis, aka “inching technique; or
●
injection into the radial tunnel along the nerve with near/total resolution of pain
with the anesthetic, and/or
●
wrist and/or digital extensor muscles weakness and/or atrophy.
Non-operative treatments include:
●
elbow and wrist splinting.
Surgical considerations include either:
●
severe symptoms and signs (e.g., severe electrodiagnostic findings, continuous
paresthesias, extensor muscle atrophy) or
●
lack of improvement or resolution following nonoperative treatment trialed for at
least 3 months.
Rationale
Quality studies are not available on surgical treatment for radial nerve entrapment and
there is not evidence of its benefits. If, after at least 3 to 6 months of conservative
treatment, the patient fails to show signs of improvement, surgery may be a reasonable
option if there is unequivocal evidence of radial neuropathy that includes positive
electrodiagnostic studies and objective evidence of loss of function as outlined above.
Surgical options are invasive, have adverse effects, and are high cost. Surgery is
recommended for carefully selected patients.

ULNAR NERVE ENTRAPMENT
OVERVIEW
Ulnar neuropathies at the elbow are the second most common peripheral nerve
entrapment after carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS). They involve entrapment of the ulnar nerve
as it courses past the condylar groove into the cubital tunnel. Entrapment can occur in both
the condylar groove and the cubital tunnel. The purported risk factors for entrapment differ
between the two locations. “Tardy ulnar palsy” is a specific entity of ulnar neuropathy
following medial supracondylar fracture.
Although it is possible to entrap a nerve at any point along its course, there are two
common areas for entrapment of the ulnar nerve at the elbow (363). The first is in the
condylar groove, and the second begins immediately distal to the elbow joint in the true,
anatomic cubital tunnel (see Figure 10) (363,364). This tunnel commences as the ulnar nerve
begins to traverse distally beneath the aponeurosis (364,365,366). Most of the published
literature does not distinguish between these types of ulnar neuropathy despite the
improbability that the risk factors and treatments are the same (e.g., arthrosis would appear
more likely to affect the condylar groove segment; muscle contraction could theoretically
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

156

affect the cubital tunnel segment but not the condylar groove). This produces a substantial
lack of clarity in the available evidence.

RISK AND CAUSATION
RISK FACTORS
Entrapment can occur in both the condylar groove and the cubital tunnel. The purported
risk factors for entrapment differ between the two locations.
Risk factors for condylar groove ulnar neuropathies are thought to include flexed elbow
position due to sleep posture, arthritic disorders, joint abnormalities, ganglia, diabetes
mellitus, excessive alcohol consumption, repeated pressure on the condylar groove, and
sequelae of discrete trauma. Risk factors for cubital tunnel syndrome are thought to include
fascial bands in the muscle, muscle hypertrophy, and sleep posture. Cubital tunnel
syndrome is thought to potentially occur with sustained, repeated, forceful use, particularly
with activities involving elbow hyperflexion, although quality studies supporting this theory
are lacking.
WORK RELATEDNESS
There are no quality epidemiological studies of ulnar neuropathies at the elbow, including
either condylar groove or cubital tunnel syndrome. Unfortunately, in common practice,
these disorders are frequently not distinguished, yet the risk factors for these two different
neuropathies are believed to be quite different. Many use analogies to CTS, yet those
analogies are largely inappropriate since the theoretical mechanisms to cause CTS are
anatomically impossible at the elbow due to lack of tendons and tendon sheaths
accompanying the ulnar nerve.
Condylar groove ulnar neuropathies are thought to have risks associated with the nerve as it
traverses the elbow joint that include flexed elbow posture including sleep posture, arthritic
disorders, joint abnormalities, ganglia, diabetes mellitus (367), excessive alcohol
consumption, repeated pressure on the condylar groove, and sequalae of discrete trauma.
Cubital tunnel syndrome is thought to occur due to ulnar nerve insults distal to the elbow
joint including fascial bands in the muscle, muscle hypertrophy, and sleep posture. Cubital
tunnel syndrome is thought to potentially occur with sustained, repeated, stereotypical
forceful use. There is a study reported of ulnar neuropathy at the elbow in association with
“holding a tool in position. ” However, the study follow-up was a single occasion 3 years
later, thus a serial cross sectional study design, the dropout rate was 58%, and the case
definition was unclear. The case definition for “cubital tunnel syndrome” included Tinel’s at
the elbow; however, the Tinel’s was performed at the condylar groove and not the cubital
tunnel (368) and there were no electrodiagnostic studies. The study found only one of
approximately 10 occupation-related exposures associated with “cubital tunnel syndrome,”
thus also potentially a chance association (369).
Quality occupational epidemiological studies on the etiology of ulnar and radial
neuropathies have not been reported, thus causation of those disorders is speculative.
There are multiple theories of causation for these disorders. Olecranon bursitis can be
associated with work-related trauma. This condition is thought to arise from either acute
trauma to the olecranon bursa or unaccustomed pressure to the bursa.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

157

SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS
●
Paresthesias in an ulnar nerve distribution (typically the ulnar half of the fourth and
fifth digits)
●
Nocturnal symptoms or exacerbations
●
Pain, generally involving the medial elbow

DIAGNOSIS
INITIAL ASSESSMENT
Diagnosis of an entrapment neuropathy can generally be made on the basis of a careful
history and physical examination. Nerve conduction studies can help to localize the problem
when inching techniques are used. Because most electrodiagnostic studies omit inching
technique, the most precise diagnosis possible in such circumstances is ulnar neuropathy at
the elbow. Treating ulnar neuropathy at the elbow empirically as described below can often
prevent the need to more precisely define the location of the nerve entrapment.
Consideration should be given to avoiding discomfort to the patient and the cost of
electrodiagnostic studies until after the failure of empiric treatment.
Proper testing to localize the abnormality involves a nerve conduction study that includes at
least stimulation above and below the elbow (64). The role for the “inching technique” to
isolate the location of the nerve conduction velocity decrement and infer the precise
location of the entrapment, while recommended by the American Academy of
Electrodiagnostic Medicine (64) and logical for its importance to treatment has not been
delineated in quality interventional studies. (Cubital tunnel syndrome should theoretically
be amenable to treatment with simple decompression. Ulnar neuropathies in the condylar
groove should theoretically be less amenable to simple (aka “in situ”) decompression.) Aside
from surgical studies, there are no quality studies on which to rely for treatment of ulnar
neuropathies, and there is little quality evidence of benefits of treatment options.
Ultrasound and MRI have been used for evaluation of the ulnar nerve (370).
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
The differential diagnosis for ulnar neuropathy at the elbow particularly includes ulnar
neuropathy at the wrist, C8 cervical radiculopathies, and other neurological entrapments
located between the spinal cord and ulnar nerve in the carpal canal including thoracic outlet
syndrome, diabetic neuropathy, neuropathy from alcohol, other systemic neuropathies,
stroke, other cerebrovascular events, and central nervous system tumors. Most other
causes may be eliminated or the probability reduced by conducting a careful history,
physical exam, or focused testing. Some have reported the vast majority of these patients
have no apparent cause (371).
Patients with a presumptive diagnosis of ulnar neuropathy at the elbow should have: 1)
tingling or numbness in an ulnar nerve distribution, generally involving the small digit and
ulnar half of the ring finger; and often have 2) symptoms that are provoked either
nocturnally or with sustained elbow flexion. Patients with a confirmed diagnosis of ulnar
neuropathy at the elbow should have both symptoms as with a presumptive diagnosis
above, and a confirmatory electrodiagnostic study (EDS) interpreted as consistent with ulnar
neuropathy at the elbow. To make a diagnosis of cubital tunnel syndrome requires inching

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

158

technique to define the abnormality to the cubital tunnel (rather than in the condylar
groove, or “funny bone”).

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
ELECTROMYOGRAPHY
ELECTROMYOGRAPHY FOR DIAGNOSING SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC PERIPHERAL NERVE
ENTRAPMENTS
Recommended
Electrodiagnostic studies are recommended to assist in the diagnosis of subacute or chronic
peripheral nerve entrapments, including ulnar neuropathies, radial neuropathies and
median neuropathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Patients with subacute or chronic paresthesias with or without pain, particularly with
unclear diagnosis. In addition to segmental analysis (e.g., above- versus below-elbow
conduction), patients with peripheral neuropathies in the elbow region should generally
have inching technique performed to localize the entrapment which assists with clinical
management (American Association of Electrodiagnostic Medicine, 1999). It has been stated
that most of these patients do not require these tests, rather initially require non-operative
treatment (Svernlov et al., 2009).

ELECTRODIAGNOSTIC STUDIES
ELECTRODIAGNOSTIC STUDIES FOR DIAGNOSIS AND PRE-OPERATIVE ASSESSMENT OF
PERIPHERAL NERVE ENTRAPMENTS
Recommended
Quality electrodiagnostic studies (see above) are recommended to assist in securing a firm
diagnosis for those patients without a clear diagnosis. ED studies are also recommended as
one of two methods to attempt to objectively secure a diagnosis prior to surgical release.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
ELECTRODIAGNOSTIC STUDIES FOR INITIAL EVALUATION OF PATIENTS SUSPECTED OF
HAVING A PERIPHERAL NERVE ENTRAPMENT
Not Recommended
Electrodiagnostic studies are not recommended for initial evaluation of most patients as it
does not change the management of the condition and other interventions are believed to
be efficacious.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

159

Rationale
ED studies are the only unequivocally objective measures of nerve function (Jablecki et al.,
2002, Rempel et al., 1998). However, there are both false-positive and false-negative test
results that demand that the physician understand the pre-test probabilities and be capable
of interpreting the results and placing them in an appropriate clinical context. For example,
ED studies should not be ordered in settings where the clinical history suggests a low
likelihood of nerve entrapment because the probability of a false-positive test result may be
well above 50%. ED studies are primarily of assistance in: 1) identifying an anatomic location
of nerve conduction slowing; 2) identifying objective evidence for alternate diagnostic
considerations (e.g., cervical radiculopathy); and 3) quantifying nerve function to assure the
physician that an operative state such as CTS is present. A survey of 350 records of
electrodiagnostic studies found only 34% compliance with the AAEM guideline (see Table 7)
(Thibault et al., 2005). ED studies are not invasive or minimally invasive (depending on
whether the EMG component is required), have minimal adverse effects, and are high cost.
They are recommended for evaluation of select cases to assist in confirming peripheral
nerve entrapments such as pronator syndrome, ulnar neuropathies at the elbow and radial
neuropathies.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (MRI)
MRI FOR EVALUATION AND DIAGNOSIS OF ULNAR NEUROPATHIES AT THE ELBOW
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of MRI for the evaluation and diagnosis
of ulnar neuropathies at the elbow.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies available demonstrating superiority of ultrasound or MRI over
other available tests to evaluate and diagnose. Therefore, there is no recommendation for
or against the use of ultrasound and MRI.

ULTRASOUND
DIAGNOSTIC ULTRASOUND FOR EVALUATION AND DIAGNOSIS OF ULNAR NEUROPATHIES
AT THE ELBOW
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of diagnostic ultrasound for the
evaluation and diagnosis of ulnar neuropathies at the elbow.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

160

There are no quality studies available demonstrating superiority of ultrasound or MRI over
other available tests to evaluate and diagnose. Therefore, there is no recommendation for
or against the use of ultrasound and MRI.

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
ANTIEMETICS
See the ACOEM Antiemetics Guideline.

OVERVIEW
Initial care involves seeking potential causal factors that can be changed. This is believed to
include hyperflexion of the elbow during sleep, work or avocational activities (343,372), as well
as avoiding leaning on the elbow/nerve (see elbow splinting section below).
Initial treatment should be non-surgical. Patients are most commonly treated with elbow
splinting, especially nocturnally to prevent hyperflexion. Activity modification to avoid
hyperflexion is usually also prescribed. Surgical release, either simple (aka “in situ”)
decompression or transposition may be necessary if non-operative measures fail.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been used for treatment of ulnar
neuropathies to address beliefs in inflammatory mechanisms or to manage associated pain.
NSAIDs have also been used for treatment of CTS (373,374,375,376,377). Acetaminophen and
paracetamol are sometimes utilized to treat neuropathies, although their effects on
cyclooxygenase activity are minimal, and they are not anti-inflammatory.
Glucocorticosteroids have been used for treatment of peripheral neuropathies, particularly
CTS through both oral and injection routes (378,379,380,381,382,383,384). Although these
medications are considered to be anti-inflammatory corticosteroids, absent an
inflammatory arthropathy or infection, CTS also does not typically evidence inflammation.
Thus, the exact mechanism of action is uncertain. Evidence indicates that carpal tunnel
injections are superior to oral steroids for treatment of CTS (382).
Opioids have occasionally been used to treat pain for patients with ulnar neuropathies at
the elbow. These medications have primarily been used for a few nights in the post-surgical
timeframe (see Chronic Pain guideline for a detailed discussion of opioids and their
management).
Treatment of neuropathies, especially CTS, with pyridoxine (Vitamin B6) has been attempted
(373,385,386,387,388)
as there has been some association between pyridoxine deficiencies and
peripheral neuropathies, as well as reports of associations of deficiencies with CTS in some
(389)
, but not all studies (390). Vitamin B12 has been reported as a successful treatment for
stroke patients with CTS (391).
Topical lidocaine patches have been increasingly used to treat numerous pain conditions
through transdermal application of topical anesthetic (392,393,394).
Topically administered ketamine has been used in experimental models for hyperalgesia
(395)
. It has also been used to treat neuropathic pain (396).
Treatment of hand, wrist and forearm MSDs and CTS with magnets (397) and pulsed magnetic
field therapy (398) has been attempted to manage pain.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

161

Elbow splinting has been used for treatment of ulnar neuropathies at the elbow, particularly
nocturnal splinting or bracing (343,364,372,399).
Acupuncture, biofeedback, manipulation and mobilization, massage, soft tissue massage,
iontophoresis, and phonophoresis have been used to treat many patients. There is evidence
of its efficacy for several of these for treatment of chronic spine disorders (see Chronic Pain
and Low Back Disorders guidelines).
Low level laser therapy has not been reported in a quality trial for treatment of ulnar
neuropathy patients. Low-level laser treatment (LLLT) has been used to treat MSDs including
CTS (400,401). It usually involves laser energy that does not induce significant heating (the
theory is that the mechanism of action is through photoactivation of the oxidative chain)
(402)
. Ultrasound has been used to treat many MSDs including CTS (403,404,405).
There are several surgical procedures for treatment of ulnar neuropathy at the elbow.
Transposition of the ulnar nerve has been utilized for treatment of ulnar neuropathies at the
elbow for more than 100 years (406,407). Various modifications of the surgical technique have
been subsequently described (408-421). Subsequently, a simple decompression procedure has
been developed for true cubital tunnel syndrome (366,422-426). Other procedures include
medial epicondylectomy (427), anterior submuscular transposition (428) and endoscopic
approaches (429).
The most common locations for compression of the ulnar nerve are reportedly (430):
●
●
●
●
●

Presence of epitrochleo-anconeus muscle 9 (14%)
Adhesion to the medial epicondyle 25 (38%)
Presence of a ligament of Struthers 4 (6%)
Medical intermuscular septum 20 (30%)
Other (scar, pannus, adhesion, lipoma, synovial cyst) 8 (12%)

Referral for surgery may be indicated for patients who have red flags of a serious nature
(e.g., compressive neuropathy secondary to acute fracture), or have failed to respond to
non-surgical management including elbow posture modifications. Surgical considerations
depend on the confirmed diagnosis of the presenting symptoms. If surgery is a
consideration, counseling regarding likely outcomes, risks, and benefits, and especially
expectations is important. It is also important to set pre-operative expectations that there is
a necessity to adhere to the rehabilitative exercise regimen and work through postoperative pain. In the post-operative phase, range-of-motion exercises should involve the
elbow, as well as the wrist and shoulder to avoid frozen shoulder (“adhesive capsulitis”). If
there is no clear indication for surgery, referring the patient to a clinician experienced in
non-operative treatment may aid in formulating a treatment plan (431,432,433,434).

ACTIVITY MODIFICATION AND EXERCISE
ERGONOMIC INTERVENTIONS FOR ULNAR NEUROPATHIES AT THE ELBOW
Recommended
In settings with sustained or repeated hyperflexion of the elbow (> 90 degrees), ergonomic
interventions are recommended to reduce elbow flexion.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

162

Rationale
There are no quality studies of ergonomic interventions for epicondylalgia, although
ergonomics interventions have been attempted in numerous occupational settings
(Verhagen et al., 2006). However, a few RCTs have explored keyboard workstations (Rempel
et al., 1999, Rempel et al., 2006, Tittiranonda et al., 1999, Gerr et al., 2005) (see Hand,
Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline). There also have been quality studies reported
regarding participatory ergonomics programs; however, those are mainly reports of patients
with spine disorders in programs whose purpose is return to work (Arnetz et al., 2003) (see
Low Back Disorders guideline). Despite the lack of quality evidence, reductions in job
physical factors, particularly high force, are thought to be beneficial (Herbert et al., 2000)
(see Work-Relatedness). There also are experimental studies of different equipment
(Simmer-Beck et al., 2006); however, reports of linkage with MSDs are lacking.
There are no quality studies of ergonomic interventions for epicondylalgia or other elbow
MSDs in physically demanding occupations. Interventions which reduce forceful, repeated
pinching or alleviating localized compression by sharp objects may be theoretically helpful
(Vogel et al., 1989, Ploetz, 1938, Hadji-Zavar, 1959, Compere, 1933, Hume et al., 1990,
Hauck, 1923, Sperling, 1951, Zelle et al., 1936, Lapidus et al., 1952, Fahey et al., 1954,
Lipscomb, 1959, Lenggenhager, 1969, Sairanan, 1957, Rayan, 1990, Moore, 2000, Gorsche
et al., 1998). Quality evidence is not available for effectiveness of ergonomic interventions
on MSD injury rates in typical manufacturing settings. However, given available evidence of
risk factors, interventions are recommended where there are combinations of risk factors;
particularly combined high force and high repetition (see Work-Relatedness).
Management/supervisor and labor/employee support are often necessary for optimal
success of these programs. While quality evidence is lacking for the use of ergonomics
training, it is thought to be beneficial in high-risk settings and is recommended.
ERGONOMICS TRAINING IN MODERATE- OR HIGH-RISK MANUFACTURING SETTINGS
Recommended
Ergonomics training is recommended in moderate- or high-risk manufacturing settings.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies of ergonomic interventions for epicondylalgia, although
ergonomics interventions have been attempted in numerous occupational settings .
However, a few RCTs have explored keyboard workstations (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm
Disorders guideline). There also have been quality studies reported regarding participatory
ergonomics programs; however, those are mainly reports of patients with spine disorders in
programs whose purpose is return to work (see Low Back Disorders guideline). Despite the
lack of quality evidence, reductions in job physical factors, particularly high force, are
thought to be beneficial (see Work-Relatedness). There also are experimental studies of
different equipment ; however, reports of linkage with MSDs are lacking. There are no

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

163

quality studies of ergonomic interventions for epicondylalgia or other elbow MSDs in
physically demanding occupations. Interventions which reduce forceful, repeated pinching
or alleviating localized compression by sharp objects may be theoretically helpful . Quality
evidence is not available for effectiveness of ergonomic interventions on MSD injury rates in
typical manufacturing settings. However, given available evidence of risk factors,
interventions are recommended where there are combinations of risk factors; particularly
combined high force and high repetition (see Work-Relatedness). Management/supervisor
and labor/employee support are often necessary for optimal success of these programs.
While quality evidence is lacking for the use of ergonomics training, it is thought to be
beneficial in high-risk settings and is recommended.
Evidence
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of ergonomic interventions.
POSITION OF ELBOWS DURING SLEEP
Recommended
It is recommended that patients be taught to sleep with their elbows extended, rather than
flexed.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There is no quality evidence evaluating the use of sleep postures to treat elbow nerve
entrapment. However, hyperflexed elbow postures appear to prominently produce the
symptoms and theoretically compress the ulnar nerve at the elbow (condylar groove or
cubital tunnel segments), thus avoidance of these postures appears important. Teaching
patients to change sleep posture requires some efforts and time for the patient to adjust.
This intervention is not invasive, has low or no adverse effects, is not costly and is
recommended.
ELBOW POSTURE DURING WORK OR AVOCATIONAL ACTIVITIES
Recommended
Patients are recommended to avoid hyperflexed (>90º) elbow postures at work (or during
avocational activities) (Elhassan et al., 2007, Dawson, 1993).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There is no quality evidence. However, hyperflexed elbow postures appear to prominently
produce the symptoms, thus avoidance of these postures appears important at both work
or during hobbies or other activities. It is noteworthy that this appears to affect few patients
as few jobs require hyperflexed elbow postures. This intervention may require application of
workplace limitations. This intervention is not invasive, has low or no adverse effects, but
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

164

could be costly if there is no accommodation for the workplace limitations available.
Nevertheless, this intervention is recommended.
EXERCISES FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR NEUROPATHY AT
THE ELBOW
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of exercises for acute, subacute, or
chronic ulnar neuropathy at the elbow.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There is one moderate-quality trial (Svernlov et al., 2009), however, it had methodological
problems that may have resulted in a lack of clear evidence in favor of one treatment or
another. By analogy, there also is not evidence of efficacy of exercises for treatment of CTS.
Thus, it is unclear if there is an independent benefit from tendon-gliding exercises. However,
exercise programs are not invasive, have few if any adverse effects, and are low cost if
performed independently after receiving initial instructions. Exercise programs are thought
to be highly helpful for rehabilitation of post-operative patients with significant deficits.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis. There is 1 low-quality RCT in
Appendix 1
EXERCISES FOR REHABILITATION OF POST-OPERATIVE ULNAR NEUROPATHY AT THE
ELBOW PATIENTS WITH SIGNIFICANT DEFICITS
Recommended
Exercise is recommended for rehabilitation of patients with post-operative ulnar
neuropathy at the elbow with significant deficits.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There is one moderate-quality trial (Svernlov et al., 2009), however, it had methodological
problems that may have resulted in a lack of clear evidence in favor of one treatment or
another. By analogy, there also is not evidence of efficacy of exercises for treatment of CTS.
Thus, it is unclear if there is an independent benefit from tendon-gliding exercises. However,
exercise programs are not invasive, have few if any adverse effects, and are low cost if
performed independently after receiving initial instructions. Exercise programs are thought
to be highly helpful for rehabilitation of post-operative patients with significant deficits.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

165

There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis. There is 1 low-quality RCT in
Appendix 1.

MEDICATIONS
NSAIDS FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR NEUROPATHIES AT
THE ELBOW
Not Recommended
NSAIDs are not recommended as a primary treatment for acute, subacute, or chronic ulnar
neuropathies at the elbow.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality trials that address treatment for ulnar neuropathies. However, there
are quality trials for treatment of CTS. A moderate-quality trial found an NSAID ineffective
for treatment of CTS (Chang et al., 1998) and other studies appear to also suggest lack of
efficacy (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline), thus by analogy, NSAIDs for
ulnar neuropathies at the elbow are generally not recommended. However, in patients
thought to have an inflammatory mechanism, they may be indicated. NSAIDs are not
invasive and have low adverse effects profiles, particularly when used for short courses in
occupational populations. Generic or over-the-counter formulations are low cost. A short
course of an over-the-counter NSAID may be reasonable for select patients; however,
routine use of NSAIDs for treatment of ulnar neuropathies is not recommended. There is
one high-quality study in post-operative CTS patients indicating that for post-operative pain
management, naproxen is superior to acetaminophen, which in turn is superior to placebo
(Husby et al., 2001). NSAIDs and acetaminophen may also facilitate the rehabilitation
process without the impairments associated with opioids. Thus, by analogy, NSAIDs and
acetaminophen are recommended for post-operative pain management of patients with
ulnar neuropathy.
ACETAMINOPHEN FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR
NEUROPATHIES AT THE ELBOW
Not Recommended
Acetaminophen is not recommended as a primary treatment for acute, subacute, or chronic
ulnar neuropathies at the elbow.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality trials that address treatment for ulnar neuropathies. However, there
are quality trials for treatment of CTS. A moderate-quality trial found an NSAID ineffective
for treatment of CTS (Chang et al., 1998) and other studies appear to also suggest lack of
efficacy (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline), thus by analogy, NSAIDs for
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

166

ulnar neuropathies at the elbow are generally not recommended. However, in patients
thought to have an inflammatory mechanism, they may be indicated. NSAIDs are not
invasive and have low adverse effects profiles, particularly when used for short courses in
occupational populations. Generic or over-the-counter formulations are low cost. A short
course of an over-the-counter NSAID may be reasonable for select patients; however,
routine use of NSAIDs for treatment of ulnar neuropathies is not recommended. There is
one high-quality study in post-operative CTS patients indicating that for post-operative pain
management, naproxen is superior to acetaminophen, which in turn is superior to placebo
(Husby et al., 2001). NSAIDs and acetaminophen may also facilitate the rehabilitation
process without the impairments associated with opioids. Thus, by analogy, NSAIDs and
acetaminophen are recommended for post-operative pain management of patients with
ulnar neuropathy.
NSAIDS FOR POST-OPERATIVE MANAGEMENT OF ULNAR NEUROPATHY-RELATED PAIN
Recommended
NSAIDs are recommended for post-operative pain management of ulnar neuropathy-related
pain.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Patients having recently undergone ulnar neuropathy surgical release. Generally, treat for 2
to 6 weeks post-op unless complications occur.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
See manufacturer’s recommendations.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, adverse effects, intolerance.
Rationale
There are no quality trials that address treatment for ulnar neuropathies. However, there
are quality trials for treatment of CTS. A moderate-quality trial found an NSAID ineffective
for treatment of CTS (Chang et al., 1998) and other studies appear to also suggest lack of
efficacy (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline), thus by analogy, NSAIDs for
ulnar neuropathies at the elbow are generally not recommended. However, in patients
thought to have an inflammatory mechanism, they may be indicated. NSAIDs are not
invasive and have low adverse effects profiles, particularly when used for short courses in
occupational populations. Generic or over-the-counter formulations are low cost. A short
course of an over-the-counter NSAID may be reasonable for select patients; however,
routine use of NSAIDs for treatment of ulnar neuropathies is not recommended. There is
one high-quality study in post-operative CTS patients indicating that for post-operative pain

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

167

management, naproxen is superior to acetaminophen, which in turn is superior to placebo
(Husby et al., 2001). NSAIDs and acetaminophen may also facilitate the rehabilitation
process without the impairments associated with opioids. Thus, by analogy, NSAIDs and
acetaminophen are recommended for post-operative pain management of patients with
ulnar neuropathy.
ACETAMINOPHEN FOR POST-OPERATIVE MANAGEMENT OF ULNAR NEUROPATHYRELATED PAIN
Recommended
Acetaminophen is recommended for post-operative pain management of ulnar neuropathyrelated pain.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Patients having recently undergone ulnar neuropathy surgical release. Generally, treat for 2
to 6 weeks post-op unless complications occur.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
See manufacturer’s recommendations.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, adverse effects, intolerance.
Rationale
There are no quality trials that address treatment for ulnar neuropathies. However, there
are quality trials for treatment of CTS. A moderate-quality trial found an NSAID ineffective
for treatment of CTS (Chang et al., 1998) and other studies appear to also suggest lack of
efficacy (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline), thus by analogy, NSAIDs for
ulnar neuropathies at the elbow are generally not recommended. However, in patients
thought to have an inflammatory mechanism, they may be indicated. NSAIDs are not
invasive and have low adverse effects profiles, particularly when used for short courses in
occupational populations. Generic or over-the-counter formulations are low cost. A short
course of an over-the-counter NSAID may be reasonable for select patients; however,
routine use of NSAIDs for treatment of ulnar neuropathies is not recommended. There is
one high-quality study in post-operative CTS patients indicating that for post-operative pain
management, naproxen is superior to acetaminophen, which in turn is superior to placebo
(Husby et al., 2001). NSAIDs and acetaminophen may also facilitate the rehabilitation
process without the impairments associated with opioids. Thus, by analogy, NSAIDs and
acetaminophen are recommended for post-operative pain management of patients with
ulnar neuropathy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

168

GLUCOCORTICOSTEROIDS (ORAL OR INJECTIONS) FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SUBACUTE,
OR CHRONIC ULNAR NEUROPATHIES AT THE ELBOW
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of oral or injections (condylar groove or
cubital tunnel) of glucocorticosteroids for the treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic ulnar
neuropathies at the elbow. There is no indication for injecting steroids into the cubital
tunnel as is done for the carpal tunnel as there is no other structure than the ulnar nerve in
the tunnel and steroid injection into the nerve may cause damage.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality trials for treatment of patients with ulnar neuropathies at the elbow.
Glucocorticosteroid injections combined with splinting have been used for treatment of
“cubital tunnel syndrome” in a small trial of low quality that also did not appear to precisely
define the location of the ulnar neuropathy and did not show additive benefit (Hong et al.,
1996). The mechanisms for development of CTS are not analogous to the ulnar nerve at the
elbow, thus there is no recommendation. Among patients thought to have an inflammatory
mechanism, these are reasonable treatment options.
Evidence
There is 1 low-quality RCT in Appendix 1.
ROUTINE USE OF OPIOIDS FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR
NEUROPATHIES
Not Recommended
The routine use of opioids is not recommended for the treatment of acute, subacute, or
chronic ulnar neuropathies at the elbow.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies of opioids for treatment of ulnar neuropathy patients.
Transposition patients have larger incisions and frequently require post-operative opioids
for at least a few days, usually in addition to NSAIDs. Some require these medications for a
longer time. Opioids are not invasive, but have very high dropout rates and otherwise high
rates of adverse effects. They are moderate to high cost depending on duration of
treatment (see Chronic Pain guideline) and are not recommended for routine use. Quality
evidence for treatment of post-operative patients with opioids to control pain is absent,
although moderate-quality evidence documents benefits of NSAIDs for that purpose in CTS
patients. Some patients have insufficient pain relief with NSAIDs, thus judicious use of
opioids may be helpful, particularly for nocturnal use. Opioids are recommended for brief,
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

169

select use in post-operative patients with primary use at night to achieve sleep postoperatively.
USE OF OPIOIDS FOR TREATMENT OF SELECT POST-OPERATIVE ULNAR NEUROPATHY
PATIENTS
Recommended
Limited use of opioids for a few days to a couple weeks is recommended for select patients
who have undergone recent ulnar neuropathy surgery, particularly if complications have
occurred.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Select patients who have recently undergone ulnar nerve surgeries, usually transpositions
and have intense pain (especially having insufficient pain relief with NSAIDs), or have
encountered complications.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Limit use to a few days up to a few weeks; primary use nocturnal to achieve post-operative
sleep. Longer term use is occasionally required for those with more significant
complications.
Rationale
There are no quality studies of opioids for treatment of ulnar neuropathy patients.
Transposition patients have larger incisions and frequently require post-operative opioids
for at least a few days, usually in addition to NSAIDs. Some require these medications for a
longer time. Opioids are not invasive, but have very high dropout rates and otherwise high
rates of adverse effects. They are moderate to high cost depending on duration of
treatment (see Chronic Pain guideline) and are not recommended for routine use. Quality
evidence for treatment of post-operative patients with opioids to control pain is absent,
although moderate-quality evidence documents benefits of NSAIDs for that purpose in CTS
patients. Some patients have insufficient pain relief with NSAIDs, thus judicious use of
opioids may be helpful, particularly for nocturnal use. Opioids are recommended for brief,
select use in post-operative patients with primary use at night to achieve sleep postoperatively.
USE OF PYRIDOXINE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR NEUROPATHIES
Not Recommended
Pyridoxine is not recommended for routine treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic ulnar
neuropathies in patients without vitamin deficiencies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

170

Rationale
There are no quality trials for treatment of ulnar neuropathy patients, thus treatment of CTS
is used by analogy. There are two quality studies that reviewed pyridoxine to treat CTS
patients (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline). However, benefits have not
been shown in the highest quality study (Spooner et al., 1993). The moderate-quality
crossover trial reported improvements in symptoms in 7 patients; however, 3 patients did
not receive the placebo although their symptoms scores on pyridoxine were lower than in a
control period (Ellis et al., 1982). While vitamin B6 is relatively low risk and patients may use
it without prescription, available evidence does not support its use for the routine
treatment of CTS, thus it is not recommended for other neuropathies including ulnar
neuropathies. However, it may be a reasonable treatment option among patients with
presumptive pyridoxine deficiency (e.g., malnutrition, alcoholism, malabsorption, especially
jejunal disorders such as sprue, etc.).
USE OF OTHER VITAMINS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR NEUROPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of other vitamins for treatment of acute,
subacute, or chronic ulnar neuropathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality trials for treatment of ulnar neuropathy patients, thus treatment of CTS
is used by analogy. There are two quality studies that reviewed pyridoxine to treat CTS
patients (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline). However, benefits have not
been shown in the highest quality study (Spooner et al., 1993). The moderate-quality
crossover trial reported improvements in symptoms in 7 patients; however, 3 patients did
not receive the placebo although their symptoms scores on pyridoxine were lower than in a
control period (Ellis et al., 1982). While vitamin B6 is relatively low risk and patients may use
it without prescription, available evidence does not support its use for the routine
treatment of CTS, thus it is not recommended for other neuropathies including ulnar
neuropathies. However, it may be a reasonable treatment option among patients with
presumptive pyridoxine deficiency (e.g., malnutrition, alcoholism, malabsorption, especially
jejunal disorders such as sprue, etc.).
LIDOCAINE PATCHES FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR
NEUROPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of lidocaine patches for treatment of
acute, subacute, or chronic ulnar neuropathies with pain.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

171

Topical lidocaine has not been evaluated for treatment of ulnar neuropathy patients. It has
been suggested to improve pain associated with CTS although the case diagnoses do not
appear well substantiated in the available study as pain complaints as an overriding
symptom among CTS patients raise concerns about alternate explanations for the symptoms
(Nalamachu et al., 2006). In one moderate-quality study, lidocaine patches were suggested
to be somewhat more effective than naproxen (Nalamachu et al., 2006); however, naproxen
does not appear particularly effective for treatment of a peripheral neuropathy and the
study had a number of weaknesses. In the other study, injection was comparable to the
patch, yet injections are likely a more effective strategy than naproxen, thus this body of
evidence somewhat conflicts. Lidocaine patches are not invasive and have low adverse
effects although some patients may experience local reactions such as skin irritation,
redness, pain, or sores. These patches are also moderately or even high cost over time. The
neuropathy is at the elbow although symptoms are usually distant, resulting in problems
with theoretical use of these patches and there is an absence of quality evidence for this
treatment of ulnar neuropathy at the elbow, thus there is no recommendation.
KETAMINE FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR NEUROPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of topically administered ketamine for
treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic ulnar neuropathies with pain.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There is no evidence supporting efficacy of ketamine for ulnar neuropathies at the elbow
and therefore, there is no recommendation for or against its use.

DEVICES
MAGNETS FOR MANAGEMENT OF PAIN FROM OF ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR
NEUROPATHIES
Not Recommended
The use of magnets is not recommended for the management of pain for acute, subacute,
or chronic ulnar neuropathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies of ulnar neuropathies. Quality evidence suggests magnets are
not efficacious for treating pain associated with CTS (Carter et al., 2002). Magnets are not
invasive, have no adverse effects, and are low cost, but other interventions have been
shown effective. Thus, magnets are not recommended for treatment of ulnar neuropathies.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

172

NOCTURNAL ELBOW SPLINTING FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC
ULNAR NEUROPATHIES
Recommended
Nocturnal elbow splinting or bracing is recommended for treatment of acute, subacute, or
chronic ulnar neuropathies at the elbow (Dawson, 1993, Svernlov et al., 2009, Neal et al.,
2010, Szabo et al., 2007).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Symptoms consistent with ulnar neuropathy at the elbow, either condylar groove or cubital
tunnel.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Elbow splints or braces are recommended to be worn while sleeping (range of 45-70
degrees used) (Elhassan et al., 2007, Svernlov et al., 2009).
Indications for discontinuation
Splints should be re-evaluated and potentially re-adjusted if no response within 2 weeks of
starting treatment, particularly to assure that the patient is wearing them properly as well
as to assess fit. If there is no improvement, splints should be discontinued and the accuracy
of the diagnosis re-evaluated.
Rationale
Nocturnal elbow splints have been evaluated in one quality trial (Svernlov et al., 2009);
however, it had methodological problems that may have resulted in a lack of clear evidence
in favor of one treatment or another. Nocturnal splints and braces are thought to be
effective. They are not invasive, have minimal adverse effects, are low cost and are
recommended.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis.

ALLIED HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
LOW-LEVEL LASER THERAPY FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR NEUROPATHIES
Not Recommended
Low-level laser therapy is not recommended for the treatment of acute, subacute, or
chronic ulnar neuropathies.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

173

Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality trials for treatment of ulnar neuropathy patients. Trials for treatment of
CTS suggest a lack of efficacy (Bakhtiary et al., 2004, Irvine et al., 2004, Naeser et al., 2002)
(see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline). Thus, low-level laser is not
recommended for treatment of ulnar neuropathies.
ULTRASOUND FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR NEUROPATHIES
Recommended
Ultrasound is recommended for the treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic ulnar
neuropathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Ulnar neuropathies that are sufficiently symptomatic to warrant treatment. Patients should
generally be given nocturnal splints and had an inadequate response.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
The regimen in the highest quality study of CTS patients consisted of daily 15-minute
sessions, 5 a week for 2 weeks, then twice a week for 5 more weeks; 1MHz with intensity 1.
0W/cm2, pulsed mode duty cycle of 1:4 and transducer area of 5cm2 (Ebenbichler et al.,
1998). Another successful regimen consisted of 15-minute sessions, 5 times a week for 3
weeks (Bakhtiary et al., 2004).
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution, failure to objectively improve or intolerance.
Rationale
There are no quality trials for treatment of patients with ulnar neuropathies. However,
there are trials for treatment of CTS that suggest modest benefit (Bakhtiary et al., 2004,
Oztas et al., 1998, Ebenbichler et al., 1998, Baysal et al., 2006, Davis et al., 1998) (see Hand,
Wrist, and Forearm Disorders guideline). Thus, by analogy, ultrasound is recommended for
select patients who have failed treatment with a nocturnal brace/splint or obtained
insufficient benefits.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

174

ACUPUNCTURE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR NEUROPATHIES AT THE
ELBOW
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of acupuncture for the treatment of
acute, subacute, or chronic ulnar neuropathies at the elbow.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of this treatment for ulnar neuropathies at
the elbow and therefore, there is no recommendation for or against use of this treatment.
BIOFEEDBACK FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR NEUROPATHIES AT THE
ELBOW
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of biofeedback for the treatment of
acute, subacute, or chronic ulnar neuropathies at the elbow.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of this treatment for ulnar neuropathies at
the elbow and therefore, there is no recommendation for or against use of this treatment.
MANIPULATION AND MOBILIZATION FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR
NEUROPATHIES AT THE ELBOW
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of manipulation and mobilization for the
treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic ulnar neuropathies at the elbow.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of this treatment for ulnar neuropathies at
the elbow and therefore, there is no recommendation for or against use of this treatment.
MASSAGE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR NEUROPATHIES AT THE ELBOW
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of massage for the treatment of acute,
subacute, or chronic ulnar neuropathies at the elbow.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

175

Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of this treatment for ulnar neuropathies at
the elbow and therefore, there is no recommendation for or against use of this treatment.
SOFT TISSUE MASSAGE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR NEUROPATHIES AT
THE ELBOW
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of soft tissue massage for the treatment
of acute, subacute, or chronic ulnar neuropathies at the elbow.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of this treatment for ulnar neuropathies at
the elbow and therefore, there is no recommendation for or against use of this treatment.
IONTOPHORESIS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR NEUROPATHIES AT THE
ELBOW
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of iontophoresis for the treatment of
acute, subacute, or chronic ulnar neuropathies at the elbow.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of this treatment for ulnar neuropathies at
the elbow and therefore, there is no recommendation for or against use of this treatment.
PHONOPHORESIS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC ULNAR NEUROPATHIES AT THE
ELBOW
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of phonophoresis for the treatment of
acute, subacute, or chronic ulnar neuropathies at the elbow.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

176

There are no quality studies evaluating the use of this treatment for ulnar neuropathies at
the elbow and therefore, there is no recommendation for or against use of this treatment.

SURGICAL RECOMMENDATIONS
SURGICAL RELEASE FOR TREATMENT OF SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC ULNAR NEUROPATHIES
(IN SITU DECOMPRESSION)
Recommended
Simple (“in situ”) decompression is recommended for patients who fail nonoperative
treatment for subacute or chronic ulnar neuropathies or patients who have emergent or
urgent indications (e.g., acute compression due to fracture, arthritides or compartment
syndrome with unrelenting symptoms of nerve impairment).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Indications
A presumptive diagnosis of ulnar neuropathy at the elbow requires both:
●
tingling and/or numbness in an ulnar nerve distribution (i.e., small digit, typically the
ulnar aspect of the ring finger and the ulnar border of the hand) and
●
symptoms that are provoked either nocturnally or with sustained elbow flexion.
A confirmed diagnosis additionally requires either:
●
electrodiagnostic testing consistent with ulnar neuropathy at the elbow, ideally
including segmental analysis/inching technique which should be done to identify the
affected ulnar nerve segment (American Association of Electrodiagnostic Medicine, 1999),
or
●
weakness or atrophy in the ulnar nerve innervated muscles.
Nonoperative treatments include ergonomic interventions, such as:
●
avoiding elbow hyperflexion,
●
avoiding leaning on the ulnar nerve in the condylar groove during work and/or
avocational activities, and
●
sleeping with the elbow(s) in an extended position which may include nocturnal
elbow splinting.
Surgical considerations for in-situ decompression/release are either:
●
severe symptoms and signs (e.g., severe electrodiagnostic findings, continuous
paresthesias, weakness or ulnar nerve-innervated muscle atrophy, and including acute
compression due to trauma such as fracture, or
●
lack of improvement or resolution following both non-operative treatments above
(elbow and wrist splinting) trialed for at least 3 months.
Generally, a simple decompression is preferred over other procedures for true cubital
tunnel syndrome (Nabhan et al., 2005, Bartels et al., 2005).

Surgical considerations for ulnar nerve transposition include one of the following:
●
nerve conduction study localization by segmental analysis to the condylar groove
segment plus severe symptoms and signs (e.g., severe EDS, continuous tingling/numbness,
hypothenar atrophy) including compression due to penetrating trauma, or
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

177

●
nerve conduction study showing delayed ulnar nerve conduction velocity without
localization to the affected ulnar nerve segment plus evidence of ulnar nerve subluxation at
the elbow plus severe symptoms and signs (e.g., severe EDS, continuous tingling/numbness,
hypothenar atrophy), or
●
lack of improvement or resolution after at least 3 months after in-situ
decompression/local release without transposition.
Rationale
Surgical indications for in-situ decompression/local release without transposition require
both a confirmed diagnosis and surgical considerations.
A presumptive diagnosis requires both (1) paresthesias in an ulnar nerve distribution and (2)
symptoms that are provoked either nocturnally or with sustained elbow flexion. A
confirmed diagnosis requires at least one of: (1) confirmatory electrodiagnostic study
interpreted as consistent with ulnar neuropathy at the elbow; and segmental analyses, aka
“inching technique” should also be done to localize the conduction delay; and/or (2)
weakness or atrophy in the ulnar nerve innervated muscles.
Surgical considerations include at least one of (1) severe symptoms and signs (e.g., severe
electrodiagnostic study findings, continuous paresthesias, weakness or atrophy in the ulnar
nerve innervated muscles, including acute compression due to fracture; or (2) lack of
improvement or resolution after both of the following non-operative treatments trialed for
at least 3 months: (a) ergonomic interventions including avoiding elbow hyperflexion and
leaning on the ulnar nerve in the condylar groove during work and/or avocational activities;
and (b) elbow(s) in an extended position during sleep, which may include nocturnal elbow
splinting.
Surgical indications for subcutaneous transposition of the ulnar nerve include at least one
of: (1) nerve conduction study localization by segmental analysis to the condylar groove
segment plus severe symptoms and signs (e.g., severe electrodiagnostic study, continuous
paresthesias, or hypothenar atrophy), including compression due to penetrating trauma; (2)
nerve conduction study showing delayed ulnar nerve conduction velocity without
localization to the affected ulnar nerve segment plus evidence of ulnar nerve subluxation at
the elbow plus severe symptoms and signs (e.g., severe electrodiagnostic study, continuous
paresthesias, hypothenar atrophy; and/or (3) lack of improvement or resolution after at
least 3 months after in-siu decompression/local release without transposition.
There are no sham-controlled trials, trials with no treatment arms or a quality non-operative
program. However, there are six moderate-quality trials, five of which compare surgical
procedures and one of which compares surgery with botulinum injections (Keizer et al.,
2002). Also, none of the studies distinguished between the different types of ulnar
neuropathies at the elbow. Two studies (Nabhan et al., 2005, Bartels et al., 2005) compared
simple decompression procedure with anterior subcutaneous transposition of the ulnar
nerve; two studies (Biggs et al., 2006, Gervasio et al., 2005) compared simple
decompression with submuscular transposition; and one study (Geutjens et al., 1996)
compared medial epicondylectomy with anterior transposition. The simple ulnar nerve
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

178

release does have some evidence of benefits over more complicated surgical procedures
such as transposition, particularly concerning complications. Surgical options for this
problem are invasive, have adverse effects and are high cost. Yet, in well-defined cases as
outlined above that include positive electrodiagnostic studies with objective evidence of
loss of function, lack of improvement may necessitate surgery and surgery for this condition
is recommended.
Evidence
There are 5 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated into this analysis.
SURGICAL RELEASE FOR TREATMENT OF SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC ULNAR NEUROPATHIES
(ANTERIOR SUBCUTANEOUS TRANSPOSITION)
Recommended
Anterior subcutaneous transposition, medial epicondylectomy is recommended for patients
who fail non-operative treatment for subacute or chronic ulnar neuropathies or patients
who have emergent or urgent indications (e.g., acute compression due to fracture,
arthritides or compartment syndrome with unrelenting symptoms of nerve impairment).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
A presumptive diagnosis of ulnar neuropathy at the elbow requires both:
●
tingling and/or numbness in an ulnar nerve distribution (i.e., small digit, typically the
ulnar aspect of the ring finger and the ulnar border of the hand) and
●
symptoms that are provoked either nocturnally or with sustained elbow flexion.
A confirmed diagnosis additionally requires either:
●
electrodiagnostic testing consistent with ulnar neuropathy at the elbow, ideally
including segmental analysis/inching technique which should be done to identify the
affected ulnar nerve segment (American Association of Electrodiagnostic Medicine, 1999),
or
●
weakness or atrophy in the ulnar nerve innervated muscles.
Non-operative treatments include ergonomic interventions including:
●
avoiding elbow hyperflexion,
●
avoiding leaning on the ulnar nerve in the condylar groove during work and/or
avocational activities, and
●
sleeping with the elbow(s) in an extended position which may include nocturnal
elbow splinting.
Surgical considerations for in-situ decompression/release are either:
●
severe symptoms and signs (e.g., severe electrodiagnostic findings, continuous
paresthesias, weakness or ulnar nerve-innervated muscle atrophy, and including acute
compression due to trauma such as fracture, or
●
lack of improvement or resolution following both non-operative treatments above
(elbow and wrist splinting) trialed for at least 3 months.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

179

Generally, a simple decompression is preferred over other procedures for true cubital
tunnel syndrome (Nabhan et al., 2005, Bartels et al., 2005). Surgical considerations for ulnar
nerve transposition include one of the following:
●
nerve conduction study localization by segmental analysis to the condylar groove
segment plus severe symptoms and signs (e.g., severe EDS, continuous tingling/numbness,
hypothenar atrophy) including compression due to penetrating trauma, or
●
nerve conduction study showing delayed ulnar nerve conduction velocity without
localization to the affected ulnar nerve sgemnt plus evidence of ulnar nerve subluxation at
the elebow plus severe symptos and signs (e.g., severe EDS, continuous tingling/numbness,
hypothenar atrophy) or
●
lack of improvement or resolution after at least 3 months after in-situ
decompression/local release without transposition.
Rationale
Surgical indications for in-situ decompression/local release without transposition require
both a confirmed diagnosis and surgical considerations.
A presumptive diagnosis requires both (1) paresthesias in an ulnar nerve distribution and (2)
symptoms that are provoked either nocturnally or with sustained elbow flexion. A
confirmed diagnosis requires at least one of: (1) confirmatory electrodiagnostic study
interpreted as consistent with ulnar neuropathy at the elbow; and segmental analyses, aka
“inching technique” should also be done to localize the conduction delay; and/or (2)
weakness or atrophy in the ulnar nerve innervated muscles. Surgical Considerations include
at least one of (1) severe symptoms and signs (e.g., severe electrodiagnostic study findings,
continuous paresthesias, weakness or atrophy in the ulnar nerve innervated muscles,
including acute compression due to fracture; or (2) lack of improvement or resolution after
both of the following non-operative treatments trialed for at least 3 months: (a) ergonomic
interventions including avoiding elbow hyperflexion and leaning on the ulnar nerve in the
condylar groove during work and/or avocational activities; and (b) elbow(s) in an extended
position during sleep, which may include nocturnal elbow splinting.
Surgical indications for subcutaneous transposition of the ulnar nerve include at least one
of: (1) nerve conduction study localization by segmental analysis to the condylar groove
segment plus severe symptoms and signs (e.g., severe electrodiagnostic study, continuous
paresthesias, or hypothenar atrophy), including compression due to penetrating trauma; (2)
nerve conduction study showing delayed ulnar nerve conduction velocity without
localization to the affected ulnar nerve segment plus evidence of ulnar nerve subluxation at
the elbow plus severe symptoms and signs (e.g., severe electrodiagnostic study, continuous
paresthesias, hypothenar atrophy; and/or (3) lack of improvement or resolution after at
least 3 months after in-siu decompression/local release without transposition. Similar to the
indications for simple decompression, the presumptive diagnosis of ulnar neuropathy at the
elbow requires both: (1) tingling and/or numbness in an ulnar nerve distribution (i.e., small
digit, typically the ulnar aspect of the ring finger and the ulnar border of the hand) and (2)
symptoms that are provoked either nocturnally or with sustained elbow flexion. A
confirmed diagnosis additionally requires either: (1) confirmatory electrodiagnostic testing
consistent with ulnar neuropathy at the elbow, ideally including segmental analysis/inching
technique showing conduction delay in the condylar groove (American Association of
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

180

Electrodiagnostic Medicine, 1999), or (2) weakness or atrophy in the ulnar nerve innervated
muscles. Generally, a simple decompression is preferred over other procedures for true
cubital tunnel syndrome (Nabhan et al., 2005, Bartels et al., 2005). Surgical considerations
for anterior subcutaneous decompression are any of: (1) nerve conduction study localizing
the delay to the condylar groove segment of the ulnar nerve plus severe symptoms and
signs (e.g., severe electrodiagnostic study findings, continuous numbness/tingling,
hypothenar atrophy), including compression due to penetrating trauma; (2) nerve
conduction study showing delayed ulnar nerve conduction velocity without localization to
the affected ulnar nerve segment plus evidence of ulnar nerve subluxation at the elbow plus
severe symptoms and signs (e.g., severe electrodiagnostic study findings, continuous
numbness/tingling, hypothenar atrophy; or (3) lack of improvement or resolution after at
least 3 months after in-situ decompression/local release without transposition.
There are no sham-controlled trials, trials with no treatment arms or a quality non-operative
program. However, there are six moderate-quality trials, five of which compare surgical
procedures and one of which compares surgery with botulinum injections (Keizer et al.,
2002). Also, none of the studies distinguished between the different types of ulnar
neuropathies at the elbow. Two studies (Nabhan et al., 2005, Bartels et al., 2005) compared
simple decompression procedure with anterior subcutaneous transposition of the ulnar
nerve; two studies (Biggs et al., 2006, Gervasio et al., 2005) compared simple
decompression with submuscular transposition; and one study (Geutjens et al., 1996)
compared medial epicondylectomy with anterior transposition. The simple ulnar nerve
release does have some evidence of benefits over more complicated surgical procedures
such as transposition, particularly concerning complications. Surgical options for this
problem are invasive, have adverse effects and are high cost. Yet, in well-defined cases as
outlined above that include positive electrodiagnostic studies with objective evidence of
loss of function, lack of improvement may necessitate surgery and surgery for this condition
is recommended.
Evidence
There are 5 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated into this analysis.
SURGICAL RELEASE FOR TREATMENT OF SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC ULNAR NEUROPATHIES
(ANTERIOR SUBMUSCULAR TRANSPOSITION)
Not Recommended
Anterior submuscular transposition is not recommended for the treatment of subacute or
chronic ulnar neuropathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no sham-controlled trials, trials with no treatment arms or a quality non-operative
program. However, there are six moderate-quality trials, five of which compare surgical
procedures and one of which compares surgery with botulinum injections (Keizer et al.,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

181

2002). Also, none of the studies distinguished between the different types of ulnar
neuropathies at the elbow. Two studies (Nabhan et al., 2005, Bartels et al., 2005) compared
simple decompression procedure with anterior subcutaneous transposition of the ulnar
nerve; two studies (Biggs et al., 2006, Gervasio et al., 2005) compared simple
decompression with submuscular transposition; and one study (Geutjens et al., 1996)
compared medial epicondylectomy with anterior transposition. The simple ulnar nerve
release does have some evidence of benefits over more complicated surgical procedures
such as transposition, particularly concerning complications. Surgical options for this
problem are invasive, have adverse effects and are high cost. Yet, in well defined cases as
outlined above that include positive electrodiagnostic studies with objective evidence of
loss of function, lack of improvement may necessitate surgery and surgery for this condition
is recommended.
Evidence
There are 5 moderate-quality RCTs incorporated into this analysis.

REHABILITATION
MODIFICATION OF WORK ACTIVITIES FOR ULNAR NEUROPATHIES AT THE ELBOW
Recommended
Removal from job tasks with repeated or sustained elbow hyperflexion is recommended for
ulnar neuropathies at the elbow.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Indications
Patients with sustained or repeated flexion of the elbow beyond 90 degrees.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution, lack of improvement, or desire of the patient to remove limitations.
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating the modification of work activities for ulnar
neuropathies at the elbow. However, where occupational factors are significant, especially
for patients with hyperflexion of the elbow, a trial of removal from that type of work may be
indicated.
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC ELBOW
MSDS
Recommended
Return-to-work programs are recommended for treatment of subacute or chronic elbow
MSDs, particularly patients with significant lost time.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

182

Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE, SEVERE ELBOW MSDS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against return-to-work programs for acute, severe elbow
MSDs.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the U. S. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007); however,
most patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited applicability
due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the U. S. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with elbow MSDs with lost time, and may
be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery. There is no recommendation for
those with acute, severe elbow MSDs, although early return to work is thought to improve
earlier, functional recovery.
Evidence
There is 1 moderate-quality RCT incorporated into this analysis (see Low Back Disorders and
Chronic Pain guidelines for additional studies).
EDUCATION FOR ELBOW DISORDERS
Recommended
Education is recommended for patients with elbow disorders.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

183

Frequency/Dose/Duration
One or two appointments for educational purposes. Additional appointments may be
needed if education is combined with occupational or physical therapy treatments. Followup educational visit(s) for more severe disorders as part of a progression towards normal
functional use is sometimes helpful.
Rationale
There are no quality studies specifically evaluating efficacy of patient education for utility or
necessity in treatment of elbow disorders. Yet, for many disorders (e.g., relationship
between elbow hyperflexion and ulnar neuropathies, cast management) education appears
essential. Some clinicians accomplish this in the course of extended patient visits, while
others routinely refer patients to an occupational or physical therapist for education.
Regardless of the approach, a few appointments for educational purposes are
recommended for select patients. The number of appointments depends on the diagnosis,
severity of the condition, and co-existing conditions. Although education is usually
incorporated as part of the overall treatment plan, an additional 1 or 2 appointments for
purely educational purposes may be helpful midway through a treatment course for the
more severely affected patient. In addition, education is low cost and this is recommended.

PROGNOSIS
Job modifications are thought to be needed in some cases to facilitate recovery.

FOLLOW-UP CARE
The clinical evaluation and progress of patients is most commonly monitored qualitatively
from appointment to appointment. Particularly, it is desirable to seek information regarding
the degree to which symptoms are present and whether the patient believes there has been
improvement. However, there are several instruments that may be utilized for monitoring
the progress of workers. These include the DASH. VAS symptoms and pain scores may also
be used. Functional status scores and Global Symptom Scores are also used, particularly in
some research studies. Grip and pinch strength measures may be utilized; however, patients
who have mild symptoms generally have normal grip strength. All of these questionnaires
are subjective and strength measures are effort-dependent, although they attempt to
provide a semi-quantitative measure that may help to gauge improvement over time.
Various exercise regimens have been utilized to treat patients with ulnar neuropathies at
the elbow, most commonly tendon-gliding and nerve-gliding exercises. In addition,
interventions are provided to address modifications to performance of ADLs and IADLs.

JOB ANALYSIS
Cases of ulnar neuropathy in the condylar groove may benefit from job analyses to identify
tasks involving pressure on the condylar groove that include leaning on the nerve or
avoiding opportunities to bump the nerve. Sustained or repeated hyperflexion of the elbow
beyond 90° also may be identified and ameliorated. Cases of ulnar neuropathy in the cubital
tunnel are thought to potentially be related to sustained or repeated high force activities or
hyperflexion of the elbow. Avoidance of high force activities may be of assistance.
Avoidance of hyperflexion is thought to also be helpful.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

184

TABLES
TABLE 1. RED FLAGS FOR POTENTIALLY SERIOUS ELBOW DISORDERS

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

185

TABLE 2. DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR NON-RED-FLAG CONDITIONS

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

186

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

187

TABLE 3. GUIDELINES FOR MODIFICATION OF WORK ACTIVITIES AND
DISABILITY DURATION

These are general guidelines based on consensus or population sources and are never meant to be applied to an individual
case without consideration of workplace factors, concurrent disease or other social or medical factors that can affect
recovery.
*These parameters for disability duration are consensus optimal targets as determined by a panel of ACOEM members in
1996, reaffirmed by a panel in 2002 and 2010. In most cases, persons with one non-severe extremity injury can return to
modified duty immediately. Additional limitations of the frequency or pressure of keyboard use or pinch grasp may be
warranted.
**If the workplace has the ability to accommodate one handed use, then there is no time loss that is generally justifiable.
Situations of severe injuries with considerable pain may be limited exceptions.
†Many of these cases require no lost time.
‡These cases are particularly challenging and longer periods of time loss are not unusual, particularly where there is no
accommodation for limitations.
€Severe cases may take 30 days or longer for disability duration, although full recovery may take several weeks to months
for some patients.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

188

CONTRIBUTORS
Editor-in-Chief:
Kurt T. Hegmann, MD, MPH, FACOEM, FACP
Evidence-based Practice Elbow Panel Chair:
Harold E. Hoffman, MD, FACOEM, FRCPC
Evidence-based Practice Elbow Panel Members:
Roger M. Belcourt, MD, MPH, FACOEM
Kevin Byrne, MD, MPH, FACOEM
Jed Downs, MD, MPH
Lee Glass, MD, JD
J. Mark Melhorn, MD, FAAOS, FACOEM, FAADEP, FACS, FASSH, FAAHS
Jack Richman, MD, CCBOM, FACOEM, FAADEP, CIME
Phillip Zinni, III, DO, FAOASM, CMRO
Methodology Committee Consultant:
Kurt T. Hegmann, MD, MPH, FACOEM, FACP
Managing Editors:
Production: Marianne Dreger, MA
Research: Julie A. Ording, MPH
Editorial Assistant:
Debra M. Paddack
Research Conducted By:
Kurt T. Hegmann, MD, MPH, FACOEM, FACP
Matthew S. Thiese, PhD, MSPH
Ulrike Ott, MSPH
Kylee Tokita
Jessica Melendez
Deborah Gwenevere
Passey Atim
Cecelia Effiong, BS
Riann Bree Robbins, BS
William Gilbert Caughey
Holly Uphold, BS
Specialty Society and Society Representative Listing:
ACOEM acknowledges the following organizations and their representatives who served as
reviewers of the Elbow Disorders guideline. Their contributions are greatly appreciated. By
listing the following individuals or organizations, it does not infer that these individuals or
organizations support or endorse the elbow treatment guidelines developed by ACOEM.
American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

189

The American Occupational Therapy Association
Marian Arbesman, PhD, OTR/L
Paula Bohr, PhD, OTR/L, FAOTA
American Physical Therapy Association
Paul LaStayo, PT, PhD, CHT
Other External Reviewers:
Robert M. Szabo, MD, MPH

DISCLOSURES OF CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Kurt T. Hegmann, MD, MPH, FACOEM, FACP (Editor-in-Chief and Methodology Committee
Consultant)
Professor and Center Director, Dr. Paul S. Richards Endowed Chair in Occupational Safety
and Health, Rocky Mountain Center for Occupational and Environmental Health, University
of Utah
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—Member, Ergonomics Committee (Chair
2001-05), ACOEM; Board of Trustees (2003-12) and Chair (2010-12), American Board of
Preventive Medicine; and Chair, Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration’s Medical
Review Board (2006-2010)
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities—Chair, Evidence-based Practice
Committee, ACOEM (2006-present); Member, Council on Scientific Affairs (2001-05),
ACOEM
Research Grants/Other Support—NIOSH (CDC) Training grants and research grants primarily
on the epidemiology of musculoskeletal disorders (e.g., CTS, shoulder tendinosis, LBP) and
truck driver safety.
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—Honoraria: Teaching honoraria from various
courses, mostly ACOEM-related; Consultations: Reed Group (consulting fee for ACOEM
Guidelines Editor-in-Chief); Consulting with companies regarding how to reduce workrelated injuries, causation and apportionment of injuries and consultations with unions
regarding return to work, work restrictions and work-relatedness injuries; Clinical: Primary,
secondary and tertiary clinical management of occupational injuries and diseases
Jeffrey S. Harris, MD, MPH, MBA, FACOEM (Methodology Committee Consultant)
President, J. Harris Associates Inc; Clinical Associate Professor, University of California at San
Francisco, University of Utah and Medical College of Wisconsin; Former Senior Physician,
The Permanente Medical Group
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—President and Member, Board of
Directors for the Collaborative for Excellence in Occupational Medicine (CEOM); Past
Secretary/Treasurer, ACOEM
Guidelines Related Professional Activities—Member, Guidelines Methodology Committee,
ACOEM; Member, Evidence-Based Practice Committee, ACOEM; Editor, ACOEM
Occupational Medicine Practice Guidelines, 1st Edition and Associate Editor, 2nd Edition; Past
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

190

Chair, Practice Guidelines Committee, ACOEM (1994-98); Cochrane Adverse Effects
Methods Group; Member, Pain, Palliative and Supportive Care Review Group; Cochrane
Effective Practice and Organization of Care Group; Past Guideline Quality Review Committee
and Guideline Medical Editor, The Permanente Federation/Care Management Institute;
Reviewer, the Cochrane Collaboration, Musculoskeletal and Low Back Groups and
Occupational Medicine Field; Past Reviewer for the American College of
Physicians/American Pain Society Low Back Guideline; GRADE Working Group; Performance
Measures Reporting Standards Working Group, Guidelines International Network; Member,
Kaiser Guideline Quality Committee
Research Grants/Other Support— Principal Investigator for a Community Benefits research
grant from Kaiser Permanente (2012); Principal Investigator for a Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation grant looking at guideline implementation (awarded to ACOEM in 1996-1997);
Principal Investigator for a Robert Wood Johnson Grant (awarded to URAC) to develop
workers’ compensation performance measures; Contributor for a Robert Wood Johnson
Grant (awarded to the University of Colorado) to develop workers’ compensation
performance measures.
John P. Holland, MD, MPH (Methodology Committee Consultant)
Principal, Holland Associates, Inc., Seattle, Washington; Clinical Assistant Professor,
Department of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences and Department of
Orthopaedics, University of Washington, Seattle
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—Board of Directors (1994-2005), ACOEM;
President (2003-04), ACOEM; Chair, Council on External Affairs (2005-06), ACOEM
Guidelines Related Professional Activities—Chair, Practice Guidelines Committee (19982000), ACOEM; Chair, Practice Guidelines Steering Committee (2003-06), ACOEM;
Methodology Advisory Group and Peer Reviewer (2001-04), Occupational Medicine Practice
Guidelines, 2nd Edition, ACOEM; Head, Research Team (1991-94), Clinical Practice
Guidelines on Low Back in Adults, AHCPR; Head, Research Team (1998-2002), Clinical
Practice Guidelines for Young Children with Developmental Disabilities, New York State
Department of Health
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None
Patricia Sinnott, PT, PhD, MPH (Methodology Committee Consultant)
Health Economist, Health Economics Resource Center, VA Palo Alto Health Care System;
Assistant Clinical Professor (without salary), Graduate Program in Physical Therapy,
University of California, San
Francisco/San Francisco State University
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—Reviewer, Physical Therapy, Pain; Topics in
Spinal Cord Injury Rehabilitation; Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development;
Member, Task Force on Workforce Issues, American Physical Therapy Association

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

191

Guidelines Related Professional Activities— Work Hardening Guideline Committee,
California Chapter, American Physical Therapy Association
Research Grants/Other Support—On-going research on spine care, PTSD, spinal cord injury,
health economics and health care administration, funded by VA Health Services Research
and Development Service and VA Rehabilitation Research and Development Service
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None
Michael S. Weiss, MD, MPH, FACOEM, FAAPMR, FAANEM (Methodology Committee
Consultant)
St. Lukes Occupational Health Services; Assistant Clinical Professor, Department of
Rehabilitation Medicine/Department of Environmental and Occupational Medicine,
University of Washington School of Medicine; Consultant, Paradigm Health, Inc.
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—Corporate Health Achievement Award
reviewer, ACOEM; Board, Northwest Occupational and Environmental Medical Association;
Resident Advisory Committee, University of Washington, Department of Environmental and
Occupational Medicine
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities—Member, ACOEM Evidence-based
Practice Spine Panel; Member, ACOEM Evidence-based Practice Disability Panel; Chair,
ACOEM Evidence-based Practice Opioids Panel; Chair, ACOEM Guidelines Methodology
Committee
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None
Evidence-based Practice Elbow Panel Members
Roger M. Belcourt, MD, MPH, FACOEM Consultant, OEM
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—Past President, Western Occupational
and Environmental Medical Association (WOEMA); Member, ACOEM Presidential
Appointment to Biosafety Task Force Committee; Past President, Nevada Health
Professional Assistance Foundation
Guidelines Related Professional Activities—Member, ACOEM Evidence-based Practice
Elbow Panel; Contributing Author, Guides to the Evaluation of Disease and Injury Causation,
AMA (2008)
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None
Kevin Byrne, MD, MPH, FACOEM, FAAFP Medical Division Officer, Wellness Department,
Navy Medical Hospital; President, CorpMed, LLC
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—Member, Ergonomics Committee,
ACOEM

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

192

Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities—None
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None
Lee S. Glass, MD, JD Associate Medical Director, State of Washington’s Department of Labor
and Industries
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—Past Chair, Coding and Classification
Committee, ACOEM; Member, Council on OEM Practice, ACOEM; ACOEM Representative to
AMA’s Relative Value System Update Committee; ACOEM Representative to AMA’s
CPT® Editorial Advisory Committee; Committee on Homeland Security, State of Washington
Department of Emergency Management; Disaster Preparedness Task Force, Washington
State Medical Association; Bioterrorism Preparedness and Response Program Advisory
Committee, Washington State’s Department of Health; Member, Expert Panel, Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Prevention of Prescription Abuse in the
Workplace
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities—Member, APS/ACP Low Back Pain
Guideline Project; Member, IOM/ASP Back Pain Panel; Immediate Past Chair, Guidelines
Committee, ACOEM; Editor, ACOEM’s Occupational Medicine Practice Guidelines, 2nd
Edition; and Past Associate Editor, APG Insights
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None
Harold Hoffman, MD (Panel Chair) Specialist in Occupational and Environmental Medicine;
Adjunct Assistant Professor, Department of Medicine, Division of Preventive Medicine,
University of Alberta; Consultant at the Occupational and Environmental Medicine Clinic,
University of Alberta; Occupational Medicine consultant for several industries
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—None
Guidelines Related Professional Activities—Member, Practice Guidelines Committee,
ACOEM (Second and Third Edition)
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None
J. Mark Melhorn, MD, FAAOS, FACOEM, FAADEP, FACS, FASSH, FAAHS The Hand Center, P.
A. ; Clinical Associate Professor, Section of Orthopaedics, Department of Surgery, University
of Kansas School of Medicine - Wichita
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations – Past Board Chair, Current Past President
and Current Chairman of Nomination Committee, and Member of Ethics & Discipline
Committee, American Academy of Disability Evaluating Physicians; Member of Occupational
Health Committee, Program Director for Expert Witness Program, and Program Director for
Occupational Orthopaedics and Workers' Compensation: A Multidisciplinary Perspective,
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

193

American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons; Member, Stay-at-Work and Return-to-Work
Process Improvement Committee, ACOEM
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities – Member, ACOEM's Evidence-based
Practice Shoulder Panel; Lead Author, Section of Musculoskeletal Upper Extremity, AMA's
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 6th Edition; Member, Advisory Board,
The Medical Disability Advisor; Member, Medical Advisory Board, Official Disability
Guidelines; Developer and Medical Consultant, CtdMAP (MAP Managers and PHI (Physical
Health Index), co-editor of the text "AMA Guides™ to the Evaluation of Work Ability and
Return to Work" 2nd edition AMA Press (2011) and the "AMA Guides™ to the Evaluation of
Disease and Injury Causation" 2nd edition AMA Press (2014)
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None
Jack Richman, MD Executive Vice President and Medical Director, AssessMed Inc. ;
President, AssessMed Quality Review
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—Chair, Research Committee of the
Canadian Institute for the Relief of Pain and Disability (CIRPD)
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities—Member, Guidelines Committee, ACOEM
(2nd Edition); Ontario Government Occupational Disease Panel for the Workplace Safety
and Insurance Board; and Chair, Standards Committee, Canadian Society of Medical
Evaluators
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None
Phillip Zinni III, DO, FAOASM, MS, ATC Managing Director, StemGen Therapeutics; National
Medical Director, The Industrial Athlete; Chief Medical Officer, Health Resource
Professionals
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—Past President, American Osteopathic
Academy of Sports Medicine
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities—Member, Guidelines Committee, ACOEM
(2nd Edition); Member, Guidelines Committee, PPE (3rd Edition)
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

194

REFERENCES
1. Mannion, A. F., Muntener, M., Taimela, S., Dvorak, J. . Comparison of three active therapies for
chronic low back pain: results of a randomized clinical trial with one-year follow-up. Rheumatology;
Jul 2001.
2. Kankaanpaa, M., Taimela, S., Airaksinen, O., Hanninen, O. . The efficacy of active rehabilitation in
chronic low back pain. Effect on pain intensity, self-experienced disability, and lumbar fatigability.
Spine; May 15 1999.
3. Cohen, I., Rainville, J. . Aggressive exercise as treatment for chronic low back pain. Sports Med; 2002.
4. Danielsen, J. M., Johnsen, R., Kibsgaard, S. K., Hellevik, E. . Early aggressive exercise for
postoperative rehabilitation after discectomy. Spine; Apr 15 2000.
5. Faro, F., Wolf, J. M. . Lateral epicondylitis: review and current concepts. J Hand Surg Am; Oct 2007.
6. Doran, A., Gresham, G. A., Rushton, N., Watson, C. . Tennis elbow. A clinicopathologic study of 22
cases followed for 2 years. Acta Orthop Scand; Dec 1990.
7. Regan, W., Wold, L. E., Coonrad, R., Morrey, B. F. . Microscopic histopathology of chronic refractory
lateral epicondylitis. Am J Sports Med; Nov-Dec 1992.
8. Eygendaal, D., Rahussen, F. T., Diercks, R. L. . Biomechanics of the elbow joint in tennis players and
relation to pathology. Br J Sports Med; Nov 2007.
9. Nirschl, RP, Ashman, ES. Elbow tendinopathy: tennis elbow. Clin Sports Med; 2003.
10. Gross, D. P., Battie, M. C., Asante, A. . Development and validation of a short-form functional
capacity evaluation for use in claimants with low back disorders. J Occup Rehabil; Mar 2006.
11. Mayer, TG, Gatchel, RJ. Functional Restoration for Spinal Disorders: The Sports Medicine
Approach. 1988.
12. Mayer, TG, Gatchel, RJ, Kishino, N,et al. Objective assessment of spine function following industrial
accident. A prospective study with comparison group and one-year follow-up. Spine; 1985.
13. Mayer, T. G., Gatchel, R. J., Kishino, N., Keeley, J., Mayer, H., Capra, P., Mooney, V. . A prospective
short-term study of chronic low back pain patients utilizing novel objective functional measurement.
Pain; Apr 1986.
14. Mayer, T. G., Gatchel, R. J., Mayer, H., Kishino, N. D., Keeley, J., Mooney, V. . A prospective twoyear study of functional restoration in industrial low back injury. An objective assessment procedure.
JAMA; Oct 2 1987.
15. Rainville, J., Kim, R. S., Katz, J. N. . A review of 1985 Volvo Award winner in clinical science: objective
assessment of spine function following industrial injury: a prospective study with comparison group
and 1-year follow-up. Spine; Aug 15 2007.
16. Jousset, N., Fanello, S., Bontoux, L., Dubus, V., Billabert, C., Vielle, B., Roquelaure, Y., PenneauFontbonne, D., Richard, I. . Effects of functional restoration versus 3 hours per week physical therapy:
a randomized controlled study. Spine; Mar 1 2004.
17. Hildebrandt, J., Pfingsten, M., Saur, P., Jansen, J. . Prediction of success from a multidisciplinary
treatment program for chronic low back pain. Spine; May 1 1997.
18. Dorland. Dorland&#x27;s Illustrated Medical Dictionary 30th edition. 2003.
19. Khan, KM., Cook, JL., Sci, BA., Taunton, JE, Bonar, F. . Overuse tendinosis, not tendinitis. Part 1: a
new paradigm for a difficult clinical problem. . Phys Sports Med. ; 2000.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

195

20. Shiri, R., Viikari-Juntura, E., Varonen, H., Heliovaara, M. . Prevalence and determinants of lateral
and medial epicondylitis: a population study. Am J Epidemiol; Dec 1 2006.
21. Bernard, B. P. . Musculoskeletal Disorders and Workplace Factors. A Critical Review of
Epidemiologic Evidence for Work-Related Musculoskeletal Disorders of the Neck, Upper Extremity,
and Low Back. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health; 1997.
22. Kuorinka, I., Forcier. Work Related Musculoskeletal Disorders (WMSDs): A Reference Book for
Prevention. 1995.
23. National Research Council and Institute of Medicine. Musculoskeletal Disorders and the
Workplace: Low Back and Upper Extremities. 2001.
24. Bellamy, N, Buchanan, WW, Goldsmith, CH, Campbell, J, Stitt, LW. Validation study of WOMAC: a
health status instrument for measuring clinically important patient relevant outcomes to
antirheumatic drug therapy in patients with osteoarthritis of the hip or knee. J Rheumatol; Dec 1988.
25. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Nonfatal Occupational Illness Data by Category of Illness, 1992-1994.
1995.
26. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Nonfatal Occupational Injuries and Illnesses Requiring Days Away from
Work, 2008. 2009.
27. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Workplace Injuries and Illnesses in 1996. 1997.
28. Brogmus, G. E., Sorock, G. S., Webster, B. S. . Recent trends in work-related cumulative trauma
disorders of the upper extremities in the United States: an evaluation of possible reasons. J Occup
Environ Med; Apr 1996.
29. Hales, T. R., Bernard, B. P. . Epidemiology of work-related musculoskeletal disorders. Orthop Clin
North Am; Oct 1996.
30. Silverstein, B., Welp, E., Nelson, N., Kalat, J. . Claims incidence of work-related disorders of the
upper extremities: Washington state, 1987 through 1995. Am J Public Health; Dec 1998.
31. Snider, RK (Ed). . Essentials of Musculoskeletal Care. American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons
and American Academy of Pediatrics; 1997.
32. Goldman, S. B., Brininger, T. L., Schrader, J. W., Koceja, D. M. . A review of clinical tests and signs
for the assessment of ulnar neuropathy. J Hand Ther; Jul-Sep 2009.
33. Institute for Work & Health. The DASH Outcome Measure. Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and
Hand.
34. Pransky, G., Feuerstein, M., Himmelstein, J., Katz, J. N., Vickers-Lahti, M. . Measuring functional
outcomes in work-related upper extremity disorders. Development and validation of the Upper
Extremity Function Scale. J Occup Environ Med; Dec 1997.
35. Kryger, A. I., Lassen, C. F., Andersen, J. H. . The role of physical examinations in studies of
musculoskeletal disorders of the elbow. Occup Environ Med; Nov 2007.
36. Pansky, B. Review of Gross Anatomy, 6th ed. . 1996.
37. Thiese, MS., Hegmann, KT., Garg, A. . Prevalance of lateral epiconylitis and physical examination
findings in a cohort at baseline. Proceedings of the Prevention of Musculoskeletal Disorders
Conference. Premus. ; 2004.
38. Mallen, C. D., Chesterton, L. S., Hay, E. M. . Tennis elbow. Br Med J; 2009.
39. Cannon, D. E., Dillingham, T. R., Miao, H., Andary, M. T., Pezzin, L. E. . Musculoskeletal disorders in
referrals for suspected cervical radiculopathy. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Oct 2007.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

196

40. Zendman, A. J., van Venrooij, W. J., Pruijn, G. J. . Use and significance of anti-CCP autoantibodies
in rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology; Jan 2006.
41. Tan, E. M., Feltkamp, T. E., Smolen, J. S., Butcher, B., Dawkins, R., Fritzler, M. J., Gordon, T., Hardin,
J. A., Kalden, J. R., Lahita, R. G., Maini, R. N., McDougal, J. S., Rothfield, N. F., Smeenk, R. J., Takasaki,
Y., Wiik, A., Wilson, M. R., Koziol, J. A. . Range of antinuclear antibodies in &quot;healthy&quot;
individuals. Arthritis Rheum; Sep 1997.
42. Ratnoff, W. D. . Inherited deficiencies of complement in rheumatic diseases. Rheum Dis Clin North
Am; Feb 1996.
43. Egner, W. . The use of laboratory tests in the diagnosis of SLE. J Clin Pathol; Jun 2000.
44. Walport, M. J. . Lupus, DNase and defective disposal of cellular debris. Nat Genet; Jun 2000.
45. Hsu, J. W., Gould, J. L., Fonseca-Sabune, H., Hausman, M. H. . The emerging role of elbow
arthroscopy in chronic use injuries and fracture care. Hand Clin; Aug 2009.
46. Dodson, C. C., Nho, S. J., Williams, R. J.,3rd, Altchek, D. W. . Elbow arthroscopy. J Am Acad Orthop
Surg; Oct 2008.
47. Rahusen, F, Surgeon, O, Eygendaal, D. Arthroscopic surgery of the elbow; indications, contraindications, complications and operative technique. Surgical Science; 2011.
48. McKillop, J. H., Fogelman, I. . Bone scintigraphy in benign bone disease. Br Med J; Jan 28 1984.
49. Van der Wall, H., Fogelman, I. . Scintigraphy of benign bone disease. Semin Musculoskelet Radiol;
Dec 2007.
50. Arce, K., Assael, L. A., Weissman, J. L., Markiewicz, M. R. . Imaging findings in bisphosphonaterelated osteonecrosis of jaws. J Oral Maxillofac Surg; May 2009.
51. Slade, J. F.,3rd, Gillon, T. . Retrospective review of 234 scaphoid fractures and nonunions treated
with arthroscopy for union and complications. Scand J Surg; 2008.
52. Malizos, K. N., Karantanas, A. H., Varitimidis, S. E., Dailiana, Z. H., Bargiotas, K., Maris, T. .
Osteonecrosis of the femoral head: etiology, imaging and treatment. Eur J Radiol; Jul 2007.
53. Murakami, H., Kawahara, N., Gabata, T., Nambu, K., Tomita, K. . Vertebral body osteonecrosis
without vertebral collapse. Spine; Aug 15 2003.
54. Bahrs, C., Rolauffs, B., Sudkamp, N. P., Schmal, H., Eingartner, C., Dietz, K., Pereira, P. L., Weise, K.,
Lingenfelter, E., Helwig, P. . Indications for computed tomography (CT-) diagnostics in proximal
humeral fractures: a comparative study of plain radiography and computed tomography. BMC
Musculoskelet Disord; 2009.
55. Ohashi, K., El-Khoury, G. Y. . Musculoskeletal CT: recent advances and current clinical applications.
Radiol Clin North Am; May 2009.
56. Haapamaki, V. V., Kiuru, M. J., Mustonen, A. O., Koskinen, S. K. . Multidetector computed
tomography in acute joint fractures. Acta Radiol; Oct 2005.
57. Miller, A., Green, M., Robinson, D. . Simple rule for calculating normal erythrocyte sedimentation
rate. Br Med J; Jan 22 1983.
58. Brigden, M. . The erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Still a helpful test when used judiciously.
Postgrad Med; May 1998.
59. Morley, K. D., Hughes, G. R. . Systemic lupus erythematosus: causative factors and treatment.
Drugs; Jun 1982.
60. Wener, M. H., Daum, P. R., McQuillan, G. M. . The influence of age, sex, and race on the upper
reference limit of serum C-reactive protein concentration. J Rheumatol; Oct 2000.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

197

61. Jablecki, CK, Andary, MT, Floeter, MK,et al. Practice parameter: Electrodiagnostic studies in carpal
tunnel syndrome. Report of the American Association of Electrodiagnostic Medicine, American
Academy of Neurology, and the American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation.
Neurology; 2002.
62. Rempel, D, Evanoff, B, Amadio, PC,et al. Consensus criteria for the classification of carpal tunnel
syndrome in epidemiologic studies. Am J Public Health; 1998.
63. Franzblau, A, Werner, RA, Johnston, E, Torrey, S. Evaluation of current perception threshold testing
as a screening procedure for carpal tunnel syndrome among industrial workers. J Occup Med; 1994.
64. American Association of Electrodiagnostic Medicine. Practice parameter for electrodiagnostic
studies in ulnar neuropathy at the elbow: summary statement. Muscle Nerve; 1999.
65. Thibault, M. W., Robinson, L. R., Franklin, G., Fulton-Kehoe, D. . Use of the AAEM guidelines in
electrodiagnosis of ulnar neuropathy at the elbow. Am J Phys Med Rehabil; Apr 2005.
66. Scheiber, C., Meyer, M. E., Dumitresco, B., Demangeat, J. L., Schneegans, O., Javier, R. M., Durkel,
J., Grob, J. C., Grucker, D. . The pitfalls of planar three-phase bone scintigraphy in nontraumatic hip
avascular osteonecrosis. Clin Nucl Med; Jul 1999.
67. Helenius, I., Jalanko, H., Remes, V., Tervahartiala, P., Salminen, S., Sairanen, H., Holmberg, C.,
Helenius, M., Nietosvaara, Y., Peltonen, J. . Avascular bone necrosis of the hip joint after solid organ
transplantation in childhood: a clinical and MRI analysis. Transplantation; Jun 27 2006.
68. Sakai, T., Sugano, N., Nishii, T., Hananouchi, T., Yoshikawa, H. . Extent of osteonecrosis on MRI
predicts humeral head collapse. Clin Orthop Relat Res; May 2008.
69. Jones, LC, Hungerford, DS. Osteonecrosis: etiology, diagnosis, and treatment. Curr Opin
Rheumatol; 2004.
70. Koo, K. H., Kim, R., Ko, G. H., Song, H. R., Jeong, S. T., Cho, S. H. . Preventing collapse in early
osteonecrosis of the femoral head. A randomised clinical trial of core decompression. J Bone Joint Surg
Br; Nov 1995.
71. Coombs, RRH, de WM Thomas, R. Avascular necrosis of the hip. Br J Hospital Med; 1994.
72. Cherian, SF, Laorr, A, Saleh, KJ, Kuskowski, MA, Bailey, RF, Cheng, EY. Quantifying the extent of
femoral head involvement in osteonecrosis. J Bone Joint Surg Am; 2003.
73. Radke, S., Rader, C., Kenn, W., Kirschner, S., Walther, M., Eulert, J. . Transient marrow edema
syndrome of the hip: results after core decompression. A prospective MRI-controlled study in 22
patients. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg; Jun 2003.
74. Brunton, L. M., Anderson, M. W., Pannunzio, M. E., Khanna, A. J., Chhabra, A. B. . Magnetic
resonance imaging of the elbow: update on current techniques and indications. J Hand Surg Am; JulAug 2006.
75. Walton, M. J., Mackie, K., Fallon, M., Butler, R., Breidahl, W., Zheng, M. H., Wang, A. . The reliability
and validity of magnetic resonance imaging in the assessment of chronic lateral epicondylitis. J Hand
Surg Am; Mar 2011.
76. Watrous, B. G., Ho, G.,Jr. . Elbow pain. Prim Care; Dec 1988.
77. O'Driscoll, S. W. . Elbow instability. Acta Orthop Belg; Dec 1999.
78. Darracq, M. A., Vinson, D. R., Panacek, E. A. . Preservation of active range of motion after acute
elbow trauma predicts absence of elbow fracture. Am J Emerg Med; Sep 2008.
79. Lennon, R. I., Riyat, M. S., Hilliam, R., Anathkrishnan, G., Alderson, G. . Can a normal range of elbow
movement predict a normal elbow x ray?. Emerg Med J; Feb 2007.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

198

80. Ward, W. G., Belhobek, G. H., Anderson, T. E. . Arthroscopic elbow findings: correlation with
preoperative radiographic studies. Arthroscopy; 1992.
81. Hawksworth, C. R., Freeland, P. . Inability to fully extend the injured elbow: an indicator of
significant injury. Arch Emerg Med; Dec 1991.
82. Frick, M. A. . Imaging of the elbow: a review of imaging findings in acute and chronic traumatic
disorders of the elbow. J Hand Ther; Apr-Jun 2006.
83. Bancroft, L. W., Berquist, T. H., Peterson, J. J., Kransdorf, M. J. . Imaging of elbow pathology. Applied
Radiology; 2007.
84. Sauser, D. D., Thordarson, S. H., Fahr, L. M. . Imaging of the elbow. Radiol Clin North Am; Sep 1990.
85. Lowden, C., Garvin, G., King, G. J. . Imaging of the elbow following trauma. Hand Clin; Nov 2004.
86. Shaffer, B., O'Mara, J. . Common elbow problems: an algorithmic approach. J Musculoskel Med;
1997.
87. Spencer, E. E. . Update on radiology studies of the elbow. . Curr Opin Orthop; 2007.
88. Park, G. Y., Lee, S. M., Lee, M. Y. . Diagnostic value of ultrasonography for clinical medial
epicondylitis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Apr 2008.
89. Johnson, G. W., Cadwallader, K., Scheffel, S. B., Epperly, T. D. . Treatment of lateral epicondylitis.
Am Fam Physician; Sep 15 2007.
90. Keogh, JP, Nuwayhid, I, Gordon, JL, Gucer, PW. The impact of occupational injury on injured worker
and family: outcomes of upper extremity cumulative trauma disorders in Maryland workers. Am J Ind
Med; 2000.
91. Turner, JA, Franklin, G, Fulton-Kehoe, D. Early predictors of chronic work disability associated with
carpal tunnel syndrome: a longitudinal workers&#x27; compensation cohort study. Am J Ind Med;
2007.
92. Bonzani, PJ, Millender, L, Keelan, B, Mangieri, MG. Factors prolonging disability in work-related
cumulative trauma disorders. J Hand Surg [Am]; 1997.
93. Gimeno, D, Amick, BC,3rd,, Habeck, RV, Ossmann, J, Katz, JN. The role of job strain on return to
work after carpal tunnel surgery. Occup Environ Med; 2005.
94. Melhorn, JM. Working with common upper extremity problems. A Physician&#x27;s Guide to
Return to Work; 2005.
95. Melhorn, JM. Return to work: filling out the forms. 8th Annual Occupational Orthopaedics and
Workers’ Compensation: A Multidisciplinary Perspective; 2006.
96. Melhorn, JM. Carpal tunnel syndrome: three points of view on risk and recovery. J Workers Comp;
2006.
97. Talmage, JB, Melhorn, JM. How to think about work ability and work restrictions - capacity,
tolerance, and risk. A Physician&#x27;s Guide to Return to Work; 2005.
98. ACOEM Stay-at-Work and Return-to-Work Process Improvement Committee. Preventing needless
work disability by helping people stay employed. J Occup Environ Med; 2006.
99. Gabel, G. T. . Acute and chronic tendinopathies at the elbow. Curr Opin Rheumatol; Mar 1999.
100. Rineer, C. A., Ruch, D. S. . Elbow tendinopathy and tendon ruptures: epicondylitis, biceps and
triceps ruptures. J Hand Surg Am; Mar 2009.
101. Vidal, A. F., Drakos, M. C., Allen, A. A. . Biceps tendon and triceps tendon injuries. Clin Sports Med;
Oct 2004.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

199

102. Hobbs, M. C., Koch, J., Bamberger, H. B. . Distal biceps tendinosis: evidence-based review. J Hand
Surg Am; Jul-Aug 2009.
103. Sutton, K. M., Dodds, S. D., Ahmad, C. S., Sethi, P. M. . Surgical treatment of distal biceps rupture.
J Am Acad Orthop Surg; Mar 2010.
104. van Riet, RP, Morrey, BF, Ho, E, O'Driscoll, SW. Surgical treatment of distal triceps ruptures. J
Bone Joint Surg Am; 2003.
105. Yeh, PC, Dodds, SD, Smart, LR, Mazzocca, AD, Sethi, PM. Distal triceps rupture. J Am Acad Orthop
Surg; 2010.
106. Kraushaar, B. S., Nirschl, R. P. . Tendinosis of the elbow (tennis elbow). Clinical features and
findings of histological, immunohistochemical, and electron microscopy studies. J Bone Joint Surg Am;
Feb 1999.
107. Saliman, J. D., Beaulieu, C. F., McAdams, T. R. . Ligament and tendon injury to the elbow: clinical,
surgical, and imaging features. Top Magn Reson Imaging; Oct 2006.
108. Morrey, B. F. . Current concepts in the management of complex elbow trauma. Surgeon; Jun
2009.
109. Armstrong, AD, April, D. The terrible triad injury of the elbow. Curr Opinion Orthopaed; 2005.
110. Chemama, B., Bonnevialle, N., Peter, O., Mansat, P., Bonnevialle, P. . Terrible triad injury of the
elbow: how to improve outcomes?. Orthop Traumatol Surg Res; Apr 2010.
111. McKee, M. D., Pugh, D. M., Wild, L. M., Schemitsch, E. H., King, G. J. . Standard surgical protocol
to treat elbow dislocations with radial head and coronoid fractures. Surgical technique. J Bone Joint
Surg Am; Mar 2005.
112. Ring, D., Jupiter, J. B., Zilberfarb, J. . Posterior dislocation of the elbow with fractures of the radial
head and coronoid. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Apr 2002.
113. Pugh, D. M., Wild, L. M., Schemitsch, E. H., King, G. J., McKee, M. D. . Standard surgical protocol
to treat elbow dislocations with radial head and coronoid fractures. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jun 2004.
114. Bryan, RS, Morrey, BF. Fractures of the distal humerus. The Elbow and Its Disorders; 1985.
115. Mighell, M. A., Harkins, D., Klein, D., Schneider, S., Frankle, M. . Technique for internal fixation of
capitellum and lateral trochlea fractures. J Orthop Trauma; Nov-Dec 2006.
116. Cheung, E. V. . Fractures of the capitellum. Hand Clin; Nov 2007.
117. Ring, D. . Apparent capitellar fractures. Hand Clin; Nov 2007.
118. Wong, A. S., Baratz, M. E. . Elbow fractures: distal humerus. J Hand Surg Am; Jan 2009.
119. Suresh, S. . Type 4 capitellum fractures: Diagnosis and treatment strategies. Indian J Orthop; Jul
2009.
120. Dubberley, J. H., Faber, K. J., Macdermid, J. C., Patterson, S. D., King, G. J. . Outcome after open
reduction and internal fixation of capitellar and trochlear fractures. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jan 2006.
121. McKee, M. D., Jupiter, J. B., Bamberger, H. B. . Coronal shear fractures of the distal end of the
humerus. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jan 1996.
122. Sano, S., Rokkaku, T., Saito, S., Tokunaga, S., Abe, Y., Moriya, H. . Herbert screw fixation of
capitellar fractures. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; May-Jun 2005.
123. Clough, T. M., Jago, E. R., Sidhu, D. P., Markovic, L. . Fractures of the capitellum: a new method
of fixation using a maxillofacial plate. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Mar 2001.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

200

124. Liberman, N., Katz, T., Howard, C. B., Nyska, M. . Fixation of capitellar fractures with the Herbert
screw. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg; 1991.
125. Bilic, R., Kolundzic, R., Anticevic, D. . Absorbable implants in surgical correction of a capitellar
malunion in an 11-year-old: a case report. J Orthop Trauma; Jan 2006.
126. Hirvensalo, E., Bostman, O., Partio, E., Tormala, P., Rokkanen, P. . Fracture of the humeral
capitellum fixed with absorbable polyglycolide pins. 1-year follow-up of 8 adults. Acta Orthop Scand;
Feb 1993.
127. Alvarez, E., Patel, M. R., Nimberg, G., Pearlman, H. S. . Fracture of the capitulum humeri. J Bone
Joint Surg Am; Dec 1975.
128. Feldman, M. D. . Arthroscopic excision of type II capitellar fractures. Arthroscopy; Dec 1997.
129. Appelboam, A., Reuben, A. D., Benger, J. R., Beech, F., Dutson, J., Haig, S., Higginson, I., Klein, J.
A., Le Roux, S., Saranga, S. S., Taylor, R., Vickery, J., Powell, R. J., Lloyd, G. . Elbow extension test to rule
out elbow fracture: multicentre, prospective validation and observational study of diagnostic accuracy
in adults and children. Br Med J; 2008.
130. Valdes, A. M., Loughlin, J., Oene, M. V., Chapman, K., Surdulescu, G. L., Doherty, M., Spector, T.
D. . Sex and ethnic differences in the association of ASPN, CALM1, COL2A1, COMP, and FRZB with
genetic susceptibility to osteoarthritis of the knee. Arthritis Rheum; Jan 2007.
131. Jurmain, RD. Stress and the etiology of osteoarthritis. Am J Phys Anthrop; 1977.
132. Kellgren, J. H. . Osteoarthrosis in patients and populations. Br Med J; Jul 1 1961.
133. Kellgren, J. H., Lawrence, J. S., Bier, F. . Genetic Factors in Generalized Osteo-Arthrosis. Ann
Rheum Dis; Jul 1963.
134. Lawrence, J. S. . Generalized osteoarthrosis in a population sample. Am J Epidemiol; Nov 1969.
135. Bagge, E., Bjelle, A., Valkenburg, H. A., Svanborg, A. . Prevalence of radiographic osteoarthritis in
two elderly European populations. Rheumatol Int; 1992.
136. Felson, DT, Lawrence, RC, Dieppe, PA. NIH Conferences - Osteoarthritis: New Insights. Part 1: The
disease and its risk factors. Ann Intern Med; 2000.
137. Silberberg, R. Obesity and joint disease. Gerontology; 1976.
138. Burger, H., van Daele, P. L., Odding, E., Valkenburg, H. A., Hofman, A., Grobbee, D. E., Schutte, H.
E., Birkenhager, J. C., Pols, H. A. . Association of radiographically evident osteoarthritis with higher
bone mineral density and increased bone loss with age. The Rotterdam Study. Arthritis Rheum; Jan
1996.
139. Kellgren, J. H., Lawrence, J. S. . Osteo-arthrosis and disk degeneration in an urban population.
Ann Rheum Dis; Dec 1958.
140. Meachim, G., Whitehouse, G. H., Pedley, R. B., Nichol, F. E., Owen, R. . An investigation of
radiological, clinical and pathological correlations in osteoarthrosis of the hip. Clin Radiol; Sep 1980.
141. Kellgren, J. H., Moore, R. . Generalized osteoarthritis and Heberden&#x27;s nodes. Br Med J; Jan
26 1952.
142. Kellgren, J. H. . Primary generalised osteoarthritis. Bull Rheum Dis; Jan 1954.
143. Nirschl, R. P., Ashman, E. S. . Tennis elbow tendinosis (epicondylitis). Instr Course Lect; 2004.
144. Nirschl, R. P., Rodin, D. M., Ochiai, D. H., Maartmann-Moe, C. . Iontophoretic administration of
dexamethasone sodium phosphate for acute epicondylitis. A randomized, double-blinded, placebocontrolled study. Am J Sports Med; Mar-Apr 2003.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

201

145. Adelaar, RS., Maddy, L., Emroch, KS. . Diflunisal vs. naproxen in the management of mild to
moderate pain associated with epicondylitis. Adv Ther. ; 1987.
146. Simunovic, Z., Trobonjaca, T., Trobonjaca, Z. . Treatment of medial and lateral epicondylitis-tennis and golfer&#x27;s elbow--with low level laser therapy: a multicenter double blind, placebocontrolled clinical study on 324 patients. J Clin Laser Med Surg; Jun 1998.
147. Stahl, S., Kaufman, T. . The efficacy of an injection of steroids for medial epicondylitis. A
prospective study of sixty elbows. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Nov 1997.
148. van Rijn, R. M., Huisstede, B. M., Koes, B. W., Burdorf, A. . Associations between work-related
factors and specific disorders at the elbow: a systematic literature review. Rheumatology; May 2009.
149. Leclerc, A., Landre, M. F., Chastang, J. F., Niedhammer, I., Roquelaure, Y. . Upper-limb disorders
in repetitive work. Scand J Work Environ Health; Aug 2001.
150. Haahr, J. P., Andersen, J. H. . Physical and psychosocial risk factors for lateral epicondylitis: a
population based case-referent study. Occup Environ Med; May 2003.
151. Ono, Y., Nakamura, R., Shimaoka, M., Hiruta, S., Hattori, Y., Ichihara, G., Kamijima, M., Takeuchi,
Y. . Epicondylitis among cooks in nursery schools. Occup Environ Med; Mar 1998.
152. Roto, P., Kivi, P. . Prevalence of epicondylitis and tenosynovitis among meatcutters. Scand J Work
Environ Health; Jun 1984.
153. Chiang, H. C., Ko, Y. C., Chen, S. S., Yu, H. S., Wu, T. N., Chang, P. Y. . Prevalence of shoulder and
upper-limb disorders among workers in the fish-processing industry. Scand J Work Environ Health; Apr
1993.
154. Ritz, B. R. . Humeral epicondylitis among gas- and waterworks employees. Scand J Work Environ
Health; Dec 1995.
155. Hansson, G. A., Balogh, I., Ohlsson, K., Palsson, B., Rylander, L., Skerfving, S. . Impact of physical
exposure on neck and upper limb disorders in female workers. Appl Ergon; Jun 2000.
156. Luopajarvi, T., Kuorinka, I., Virolainen, M., Holmberg, M. . Prevalence of tenosynovitis and other
injuries of the upper extremities in repetitive work. Scand J Work Environ Health; 1979.
157. Lindenhovius, A., Henket, M., Gilligan, B. P., Lozano-Calderon, S., Jupiter, J. B., Ring, D. . Injection
of dexamethasone versus placebo for lateral elbow pain: a prospective, double-blind, randomized
clinical trial. J Hand Surg Am; Jul-Aug 2008.
158. Descatha, A., Leclerc, A., Chastang, J. F., Roquelaure, Y. . Medial epicondylitis in occupational
settings: prevalence, incidence and associated risk factors. J Occup Environ Med; Sep 2003.
159. Labelle, H., Guibert, R. . Efficacy of diclofenac in lateral epicondylitis of the elbow also treated
with immobilization. The University of Montreal Orthopaedic Research Group. Arch Fam Med; MayJun 1997.
160. Hay, E. M., Paterson, S. M., Lewis, M., Hosie, G., Croft, P. . Pragmatic randomised controlled trial
of local corticosteroid injection and naproxen for treatment of lateral epicondylitis of elbow in primary
care. Br Med J; Oct 9 1999.
161. Lewis, M., Hay, E. M., Paterson, S. M., Croft, P. . Local steroid injections for tennis elbow: does
the pain get worse before it gets better?: Results from a randomized controlled trial. Clin J Pain; JulAug 2005.
162. Stull, P. A., Jokl, P. . Comparison of diflunisal and naproxen in the treatment of tennis elbow. Clin
Ther; 1986.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

202

163. Spacca, G., Cacchio, A., Forgacs, A., Monteforte, P., Rovetta, G. . Analgesic efficacy of a lecithinvehiculated diclofenac epolamine gel in shoulder periarthritis and lateral epicondylitis: a placebocontrolled, multicenter, randomized, double-blind clinical trial. Drugs Exp Clin Res; 2005.
164. Ritchie, L. D. . A clinical evaluation of flurbiprofen LAT and piroxicam gel: a multicentre study in
general practice. Clin Rheumatol; May 1996.
165. Burnham, R., Gregg, R., Healy, P., Steadward, R. . The effectiveness of topical diclofenac for lateral
epicondylitis. Clin J Sport Med; Apr 1998.
166. Kroll, M. P., Wiseman, R. L., Guttadauria, M. . A clinical evaluation of piroxicam gel: an open
comparative trial with diclofenac gel in the treatment of acute musculoskeletal disorders. Clin Ther;
May-Jun 1989.
167. Schapira, D., Linn, S., Scharf, Y. . A placebo-controlled evaluation of diclofenac diethylamine salt
in the treatment of lateral epicondylitis of the elbow. Cur Ther Res. ; 1991.
168. Burton, A. A comparative trial of forearm strap and topical anti-inflammatory as adjuncts to
manipulative therapy in tennis elbow. Manual Med; 1988.
169. Callaghan, M., Holloway, J. . Towards evidence based emergency medicine: best BETs from the
Manchester Royal Infirmary. Tennis elbow and epicondyle clasp. Emerg Med J; Apr 2007.
170. Dwars, BJ, Feiter, Pde, Patka, P, Haarman, H. Functional treatment of tennis elbow. A comparative
study between an elbow support and physical therapy. . Sports, Medicine and Health; 1990;.
171. Faes, M., van den Akker, B., de Lint, J. A., Kooloos, J. G., Hopman, M. T. . Dynamic extensor brace
for lateral epicondylitis. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Jan 2006.
172. Struijs, P. A., Kerkhoffs, G. M., Assendelft, W. J., Van Dijk, C. N. . Conservative treatment of lateral
epicondylitis: brace versus physical therapy or a combination of both-a randomized clinical trial. Am J
Sports Med; Mar 2004.
173. Van De Streek, M. D., Van Der Schans, C. P., De Greef, M. H., Postema, K. . The effect of a
forearm/hand splint compared with an elbow band as a treatment for lateral epicondylitis. Prosthet
Orthot Int; Aug 2004.
174. Haker, Lundeberg T. . Elbowband, splintage and steroids in lateral epicondylalgia (tennis elbow).
. Pain Clin; 1993.
175. Hijmans, J. M., Postema, K., Geertzen, J. H. . Elbow orthoses: a review of literature. Prosthet
Orthot Int; Dec 2004.
176. Struijs, P. A., Smidt, N., Arola, H., Dijk, C. N., Buchbinder, R., Assendelft, W. J. . Orthotic devices
for the treatment of tennis elbow. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2002.
177. Struijs, P. A., Smidt, N., Arola, H., van Dijk, C. N., Buchbinder, R., Assendelft, W. J. . Orthotic devices
for tennis elbow: a systematic review. Br J Gen Pract; Nov 2001.
178. Borkholder, C. D., Hill, V. A., Fess, E. E. . The efficacy of splinting for lateral epicondylitis: a
systematic review. J Hand Ther; Apr-Jun 2004.
179. Mellor, S. . Treatment of tennis elbow: the evidence. Br MEd J; Aug 9 2003.
180. Bisset, L., Paungmali, A., Vicenzino, B., Beller, E. . A systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical
trials on physical interventions for lateral epicondylalgia. Br J Sports Med; Jul 2005.
181. Svernlov, B., Adolfsson, L. . Non-operative treatment regime including eccentric training for
lateral humeral epicondylalgia. Scand J Med Sci Sports; Dec 2001.
182. Foye, P. M., Sullivan, W. J., Sable, A. W., Panagos, A., Zuhosky, J. P., Irwin, R. W. . Industrial
medicine and acute musculoskeletal rehabilitation. 3. Work-related musculoskeletal conditions: the
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

203

role for physical therapy, occupational therapy, bracing, and modalities. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Mar
2007.
183. Luginbuhl, R., Brunner, F., Schneeberger, A. G. . No effect of forearm band and extensor
strengthening exercises for the treatment of tennis elbow: a prospective randomised study. Chir
Organi Mov; Jan 2008.
184. Altan, L., Kanat, E. . Conservative treatment of lateral epicondylitis: comparison of two different
orthotic devices. Clin Rheumatol; Aug 2008.
185. Garg, R., Adamson, G. J., Dawson, P. A., Shankwiler, J. A., Pink, M. M. . A prospective randomized
study comparing a forearm strap brace versus a wrist splint for the treatment of lateral epicondylitis.
J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jun 2010.
186. Assendelft, W., Green, S., Buchbinder, R., Struijs, P., Smidt, N. . Tennis elbow. Br Med J; Aug 9
2003.
187. Assendelft, W., Green, S., Buchbinder, R., Struijs, P., Smidt, N. . Tennis elbow. Clin Evid; Jun 2004.
188. Scher, D. L., Wolf, J. M., Owens, B. D. . Lateral epicondylitis. Orthopedics; Apr 2009.
189. Buchbinder, R., Green, S., Struijs, P. . Tennis elbow. Am Fam Physician; Mar 1 2007.
190. Buchbinder, R., Green, S. E., Struijs, P. . Tennis elbow. Clin Evid (Online); 2008.
191. Gottschalk, A. W. . Current concepts in conservative mangement of tennis elbow. Evidence-Based
Practice; 2010.
192. Vrettos, B. C. . A clinical approach to chronic injuries of the elbow. International SportMed
Journal; 2005.
193. Struijs, P. A., Korthals-de Bos, I. B., van Tulder, M. W., van Dijk, C. N., Bouter, L. M., Assendelft,
W. J. . Cost effectiveness of brace, physiotherapy, or both for treatment of tennis elbow. Br J Sports
Med; Jul 2006.
194. Smidt, N., van der Windt, D. A., Assendelft, W. J., Deville, W. L., Korthals-de Bos, I. B., Bouter, L.
M. . Corticosteroid injections, physiotherapy, or a wait-and-see policy for lateral epicondylitis: a
randomised controlled trial. Lancet; Feb 23 2002.
195. Bisset, L., Beller, E., Jull, G., Brooks, P., Darnell, R., Vicenzino, B. . Mobilisation with movement
and exercise, corticosteroid injection, or wait and see for tennis elbow: randomised trial. Br Med J;
Nov 4 2006.
196. Newcomer, K. L., Laskowski, E. R., Idank, D. M., McLean, T. J., Egan, K. S. . Corticosteroid injection
in early treatment of lateral epicondylitis. Clin J Sport Med; Oct 2001.
197. Nimgade, A., Sullivan, M., Goldman, R. . Physiotherapy, steroid injections, or rest for lateral
epicondylosis? What the evidence suggests. Pain Pract; Sep 2005.
198. Trudel, D., Duley, J., Zastrow, I., Kerr, E. W., Davidson, R., MacDermid, J. C. . Rehabilitation for
patients with lateral epicondylitis: a systematic review. J Hand Ther; Apr-Jun 2004.
199. Stasinopoulos, D., Stasinopoulos, I. . Comparison of effects of Cyriax physiotherapy, a supervised
exercise programme and polarized polychromatic non-coherent light (Bioptron light) for the
treatment of lateral epicondylitis. Clin Rehabil; Jan 2006.
200. Pienimaki, T. T., Tarvainen, T. K., Siira, P. T., Vanharanta, H. . Progressive strengthening and
stretching exercises and ultrasound for chronic lateral epicondylitis [corrected] [published erratum
appears in PHYSIOTHERAPY 1997 Jan; 83(1): 48]. Physiotherapy; 1996.
201. Martinez-Silvestrini, J. A., Newcomer, K. L., Gay, R. E., Schaefer, M. P., Kortebein, P., Arendt, K.
W. . Chronic lateral epicondylitis: comparative effectiveness of a home exercise program including
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

204

stretching alone versus stretching supplemented with eccentric or concentric strengthening. J Hand
Ther; Oct-Dec 2005.
202. Finestone, H. M., Rabinovitch, D. L. . Tennis elbow no more: practical eccentric and concentric
exercises to heal the pain. Can Fam Physician; Aug 2008.
203. Nilsson, P., Thom, E., Baigi, A., Marklund, B., Mansson, J. . A prospective pilot study of a
multidisciplinary home training programme for lateral epicondylitis. Musculoskeletal Care; Mar 2007.
204. Coombes, B. K., Bisset, L., Brooks, P., Khan, A., Vicenzino, B. . Effect of corticosteroid injection,
physiotherapy, or both on clinical outcomes in patients with unilateral lateral epicondylalgia: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA; Feb 6 2013.
205. Manias, P., Stasinopoulos, D. . A controlled clinical pilot trial to study the effectiveness of ice as a
supplement to the exercise programme for the management of lateral elbow tendinopathy. Br J Sports
Med; Jan 2006.
206. Runeson, L., Haker, E. . Iontophoresis with cortisone in the treatment of lateral epicondylalgia
(tennis elbow)--a double-blind study. Scand J Med Sci Sports; Jun 2002.
207. Saggini, R., Zoppi, M., Vecchiet, F., Gatteschi, L., Obletter, G., Giamberardino, M. A. . Comparison
of electromotive drug administration with ketorolac or with placebo in patients with pain from
rheumatic disease: a double-masked study. Clin Ther; Nov-Dec 1996.
208. Baskurt, F., Ozcan, A., Algun, C. . Comparison of effects of phonophoresis and iontophoresis of
naproxen in the treatment of lateral epicondylitis. Clin Rehabil; Feb 2003.
209. Demirtas, R. N., Oner, C. . The treatment of lateral epicondylitis by iontophoresis of sodium
salicylate and sodium diclofenac. Clin Rehabil; Feb 1998.
210. Vecchini, L., Grossi, E. . Ionization with diclofenac sodium in rheumatic disorders: a double-blind
placebo-controlled trial. J Int Med Res; 1984.
211. Lundeberg, T., Abrahamsson, P., Haker, E. . A comparative study of continuous ultrasound,
placebo ultrasound and rest in epicondylalgia. Scand J Rehabil Med; 1988.
212. Oken, O., Kahraman, Y., Ayhan, F., Canpolat, S., Yorgancioglu, Z. R., Oken, O. F. . The short-term
efficacy of laser, brace, and ultrasound treatment in lateral epicondylitis: a prospective, randomized,
controlled trial. J Hand Ther; Jan-Mar 2008.
213. Halle, J. S., Franklin, R. J., Karalfa, B. L. . Comparison of four treatment approaches for lateral
epicondylitis of the elbow*. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther; 1986.
214. Klaiman, M. D., Shrader, J. A., Danoff, J. V., Hicks, J. E., Pesce, W. J., Ferland, J. . Phonophoresis
versus ultrasound in the treatment of common musculoskeletal conditions. Med Sci Sports Exerc; Sep
1998.
215. D'Vaz, A. P., Ostor, A. J., Speed, C. A., Jenner, J. R., Bradley, M., Prevost, A. T., Hazleman, B. L. .
Pulsed low-intensity ultrasound therapy for chronic lateral epicondylitis: a randomized controlled trial.
Rheumatology; May 2006.
216. Binder, A., Hodge, G., Greenwood, A. M., Hazleman, B. L., Page Thomas, D. P. . Is therapeutic
ultrasound effective in treating soft tissue lesions?. Br Med J; Feb 16 1985.
217. Haker, E., Lundeberg, T. . Pulsed ultrasound treatment in lateral epicondylalgia. Scand J Rehabil
Med; 1991.
218. Smidt, N., Assendelft, W. J., Arola, H., Malmivaara, A., Greens, S., Buchbinder, R., van der Windt,
D. A., Bouter, L. M. . Effectiveness of physiotherapy for lateral epicondylitis: a systematic review. Ann
Med; 2003.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

205

219. van der Windt, D. A., van der Heijden, G. J., van den Berg, S. G., ter Riet, G., de Winter, A. F.,
Bouter, L. M. . Ultrasound therapy for musculoskeletal disorders: a systematic review. Pain; Jun 1999.
220. Sevier, T. L., Wilson, J. K. . Treating lateral epicondylitis. Sports Med; Nov 1999.
221. Howitt, S. D. . Lateral epicondylosis: a case study of conservative care utilizing ART and
rehabilitation. J Can Chiropr Assoc; Sep 2006.
222. Bisset, L. M., Coppieters, M. W., Vicenzino, B. . Sensorimotor deficits remain despite resolution
of symptoms using conservative treatment in patients with tennis elbow: a randomized controlled
trial. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Jan 2009.
223. Langen-Pieters, P., Weston, P., Brantingham, J. W. . A randomized, prospective pilot study
comparing chiropractic care and ultrasound for the treatment of lateral epicondylitis. Eur J
Chiropractic; 2003.
224. Struijs, P. A., Damen, P. J., Bakker, E. W., Blankevoort, L., Assendelft, W. J., van Dijk, C. N. .
Manipulation of the wrist for management of lateral epicondylitis: a randomized pilot study. Phys
Ther; Jul 2003.
225. Drechsler, W, Knarr, JF, Snyder-Mackler. A comparison of the effectiveness of two treatment
regimens for lateral epicondylitis: a randomized trial of clinical interventions. J Sports Rehabil; 1997.
226. Nourbakhsh, M. R., Fearon, F. J. . The effect of oscillating-energy manual therapy on lateral
epicondylitis: a randomized, placebo-control, double-blinded study. J Hand Ther; Jan-Mar 2008.
227. Vicenzino, B., Paungmali, A., Buratowski, S., Wright, A. . Specific manipulative therapy treatment
for chronic lateral epicondylalgia produces uniquely characteristic hypoalgesia. Man Ther; Nov 2001.
228. Radpasand, M., Owens, E. . Combined multimodal therapies for chronic tennis elbow: pilot study
to test protocols for a randomized clinical trial. J Manipulative Physiol Ther; Sep 2009.
229. McHardy, A., Hoskins, W., Pollard, H., Onley, R., Windsham, R. . Chiropractic treatment of upper
extremity conditions: a systematic review. J Manipulative Physiol Ther; Feb 2008.
230. Fernandez-Carnero, J., Fernandez-de-las-Penas, C., Cleland, J. A. . Immediate hypoalgesic and
motor effects after a single cervical spine manipulation in subjects with lateral epicondylalgia. J
Manipulative Physiol Ther; Nov-Dec 2008.
231. Stratford, P. W., Levy, D. R., Gauldie, S., Miseferi, D., Levy, K. . The evaluation of phonophoresis
and friction massage as treatments for extensor carpi radialis tendinitis: a randomized controlled trial.
Physiother Can; 1989.
232. Viola, L. . A critical review of the current conservative therapies for tennis elbow (lateral
epicondylitis). Australas Chiropr Osteopathy; Jul 1998.
233. Brosseau, L., Casimiro, L., Milne, S., Robinson, V., Shea, B., Tugwell, P., Wells, G. . Deep transverse
friction massage for treating tendinitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2002.
234. Buchbinder, R., Green, S. E., Youd, J. M., Assendelft, W. J., Barnsley, L., Smidt, N. . Systematic
review of the efficacy and safety of shock wave therapy for lateral elbow pain. J Rheumatol; Jul 2006.
235. Chung, B., Wiley, J. P. . Effectiveness of extracorporeal shock wave therapy in the treatment of
previously untreated lateral epicondylitis: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Sports Med; Oct-Nov
2004.
236. Speed, C. A., Nichols, D., Richards, C., Humphreys, H., Wies, J. T., Burnet, S., Hazleman, B. L. .
Extracorporeal shock wave therapy for lateral epicondylitis--a double blind randomised controlled
trial. J Orthop Res; Sep 2002.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

206

237. Melikyan, E. Y., Shahin, E., Miles, J., Bainbridge, L. C. . Extracorporeal shock-wave treatment for
tennis elbow. A randomised double-blind study. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Aug 2003.
238. Haake, M., Konig, I. R., Decker, T., Riedel, C., Buch, M., Muller, H. H. . Extracorporeal shock wave
therapy in the treatment of lateral epicondylitis : a randomized multicenter trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am;
Nov 2002.
239. Melegati, G., Tornese, D., Bandi, M., Rubini, M. . Comparison of two ultrasonographic localization
techniques for the treatment of lateral epicondylitis with extracorporeal shock wave therapy: a
randomized study. Clin Rehabil; Jun 2004.
240. Crowther, M. A., Bannister, G. C., Huma, H., Rooker, G. D. . A prospective, randomised study to
compare extracorporeal shock-wave therapy and injection of steroid for the treatment of tennis
elbow. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Jul 2002.
241. Rompe, J. D., Decking, J., Schoellner, C., Theis, C. . Repetitive low-energy shock wave treatment
for chronic lateral epicondylitis in tennis players. Am J Sports Med; Apr-May 2004.
242. Rompe, J. D., Hope, C., Kullmer, K., Heine, J., Burger, R. . Analgesic effect of extracorporeal shockwave therapy on chronic tennis elbow. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Mar 1996.
243. Mehra, A., Zaman, T., Jenkin, A. I. . The use of a mobile lithotripter in the treatment of tennis
elbow and plantar fasciitis. Surgeon; Oct 2003.
244. Pettrone, F. A., McCall, B. R. . Extracorporeal shock wave therapy without local anesthesia for
chronic lateral epicondylitis. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jun 2005.
245. Buchbinder, R., Green, S. E., Youd, J. M., Assendelft, W. J., Barnsley, L., Smidt, N. . Shock wave
therapy for lateral elbow pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2005.
246. Radwan, Y. A., ElSobhi, G., Badawy, W. S., Reda, A., Khalid, S. . Resistant tennis elbow: shock-wave
therapy versus percutaneous tenotomy. Int Orthop; Oct 2008.
247. Sems, A., Dimeff, R., Iannotti, J. P. . Extracorporeal shock wave therapy in the treatment of chronic
tendinopathies. J Am Acad Orthop Surg; Apr 2006.
248. Stasinopoulos, D., Johnson, M. I. . Effectiveness of extracorporeal shock wave therapy for tennis
elbow (lateral epicondylitis). Br J Sports Med; Mar 2005.
249. Rompe, J. D., Maffulli, N. . Repetitive shock wave therapy for lateral elbow tendinopathy (tennis
elbow): a systematic and qualitative analysis. Br Med Bull; 2007.
250. Ko, J. Y., Chen, H. S., Chen, L. M. . Treatment of lateral epicondylitis of the elbow with shock
waves. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Jun 2001.
251. Ozturan, K. E., Yucel, I., Cakici, H., Guven, M., Sungur, I. . Autologous blood and corticosteroid
injection and extracoporeal shock wave therapy in the treatment of lateral epicondylitis. Orthopedics;
Feb 2010.
252. Haker, E., Lundeberg, T. . Laser treatment applied to acupuncture points in lateral humeral
epicondylalgia. A double-blind study. Pain; Nov 1990.
253. Haker, E. H., Lundeberg, T. C. . Lateral epicondylalgia: report of noneffective midlaser treatment.
Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Nov 1991.
254. Krasheninnikoff, M., Ellitsgaard, N., Rogvi-Hansen, B., Zeuthen, A., Harder, K., Larsen, R., Gaardbo,
H. . No effect of low power laser in lateral epicondylitis. Scand J Rheumatol; 1994.
255. Vasseljen, O.,Jr., Hoeg, N., Kjeldstad, B., Johnsson, A., Larsen, S. . Low level laser versus placebo
in the treatment of tennis elbow. Scand J Rehabil Med; 1992.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

207

256. Basford, J. R., Sheffield, C. G., Cieslak, K. R. . Laser therapy: a randomized, controlled trial of the
effects of low intensity Nd:YAG laser irradiation on lateral epicondylitis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Nov
2000.
257. Haker, E., Lundeberg, T. . Is low-energy laser treatment effective in lateral epicondylalgia?. J Pain
Symptom Manage; May 1991.
258. Vasseljen, O.,Jr. . Low-level laser versus traditional physiotherapy in the treatment of tennis
elbow. . Physiotherapy; 1992.
259. Stasinopoulos, D. I., Johnson, M. I. . Effectiveness of low-level laser therapy for lateral elbow
tendinopathy. Photomed Laser Surg; Aug 2005.
260. Lam, L. K., Cheing, G. L. . Effects of 904-nm low-level laser therapy in the management of lateral
epicondylitis: a randomized controlled trial. Photomed Laser Surg; Apr 2007.
261. Stergioulas, A. . Effects of low-level laser and plyometric exercises in the treatment of lateral
epicondylitis. Photomed Laser Surg; Jun 2007.
262. Chang, W. D., Wu, J. H., Yang, W. J., Jiang, J. A. . Therapeutic effects of low-level laser on lateral
epicondylitis from differential interventions of Chinese-Western medicine: systematic review.
Photomed Laser Surg; Jun 2010.
263. Bjordal, J. M., Lopes-Martins, R. A., Joensen, J., Couppe, C., Ljunggren, A. E., Stergioulas, A.,
Johnson, M. I. . A systematic review with procedural assessments and meta-analysis of low level laser
therapy in lateral elbow tendinopathy (tennis elbow). BMC Musculoskelet Disord; 2008.
264. Stasinopoulos, D., Stasinopoulos, I., Pantelis, M., Stasinopoulou, K. . Comparing the effects of
exercise program and low-level laser therapy with exercise program and polarized polychromatic noncoherent light (bioptron light) on the treatment of lateral elbow tendinopathy. Photomed Laser Surg;
Jun 2009.
265. Molsberger, A., Hille, E. . The analgesic effect of acupuncture in chronic tennis elbow pain. Br J
Rheumatol; Dec 1994.
266. Fink, M., Wolkenstein, E., Luennemann, M., Gutenbrunner, C., Gehrke, A., Karst, M. . Chronic
epicondylitis: effects of real and sham acupuncture treatment: a randomised controlled patient- and
examiner-blinded long-term trial. Forsch Komplementarmed Klass Naturheilkd; 2002.
267. Fink, M., Wolkenstein, E., Karst, M., Gehrke, A. . Acupuncture in chronic epicondylitis: a
randomized controlled trial. Rheumatology; Feb 2002.
268. Yong, H, Zhonghua, F, Dongbin, X, Rangke, W. Introduction to floating acupuncture : Clinical study
on the treatment of lateral epicondylitis. Am J Acupuncture; 1998.
269. Davidson, J. H., Vandervoort, A., Lessard, L., Miller, L. . The effect of acupuncture versus
ultrasound on pain level, grip strength and disability in individuals with lateral epicondylitis: a pilot
study. Physiotherapy Canada; 2001.
270. Green, S., Buchbinder, R., Barnsley, L., Hall, S., White, M., Smidt, N., Assendelft, W. . Acupuncture
for lateral elbow pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2002.
271. Trinh, K. V., Phillips, S. D., Ho, E., Damsma, K. . Acupuncture for the alleviation of lateral
epicondyle pain: a systematic review. Rheumatology; Sep 2004.
272. Birch, S., Hesselink, J. K., Jonkman, F. A., Hekker, T. A., Bos, A. . Clinical research on acupuncture.
Part 1. What have reviews of the efficacy and safety of acupuncture told us so far?. J Altern
Complement Med; Jun 2004.
273. Haker, E, Lundeberg, T. Acupuncture treatment in epicondylalgia: a comparative study of two
acupuncture techniques. Clin J Pain; 1990.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

208

274. Tsui, P., Leung, M. C. . Comparison of the effectiveness between manual acupuncture and electroacupuncture on patients with tennis elbow. Acupunct Electrother Res; 2002.
275. Uzunca, K., Birtane, M., Tastekin, N. . Effectiveness of pulsed electromagnetic field therapy in
lateral epicondylitis. Clin Rheumatol; Jan 2007.
276. Calfee, R. P., Patel, A., DaSilva, M. F., Akelman, E. . Management of lateral epicondylitis: current
concepts. J Am Acad Orthop Surg; Jan 2008.
277. Price, R., Sinclair, H., Heinrich, I., Gibson, T. . Local injection treatment of tennis elbow-hydrocortisone, triamcinolone and lignocaine compared. Br J Rheumatol; Feb 1991.
278. Verhaar, J. A., Walenkamp, G. H., van Mameren, H., Kester, A. D., van der Linden, A. J. . Local
corticosteroid injection versus Cyriax-type physiotherapy for tennis elbow. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Jan
1996.
279. Altay, T., Gunal, I., Ozturk, H. . Local injection treatment for lateral epicondylitis. Clin Orthop Relat
Res; May 2002.
280. Saartok, T., Eriksson, E. . Randomized trial of oral naproxen or local injection of betamethasone
in lateral epicondylitis of the humerus. Orthopedics; Feb 1986.
281. Solveborn, S. A., Buch, F., Mallmin, H., Adalberth, G. . Cortisone injection with anesthetic additives
for radial epicondylalgia (tennis elbow). Clin Orthop Relat Res; Jul 1995.
282. Torp-Pedersen, T. E., Torp-Pedersen, S. T., Qvistgaard, E., Bliddal, H. . Effect of glucocorticosteroid
injections in tennis elbow verified on colour Doppler ultrasonography: evidence of inflammation. Br J
Sports Med; Dec 2008.
283. Barr, S., Cerisola, F. L., Blanchard, V. . Effectiveness of corticosteroid injections compared with
physiotherapeutic interventions for lateral epicondylitis: a systematic review. Physiotherapy; Dec
2009.
284. Coombes, B. K., Bisset, L., Vicenzino, B. . Efficacy and safety of corticosteroid injections and other
injections for management of tendinopathy: a systematic review of randomised controlled trials.
Lancet; Nov 20 2010.
285. Weitoft, T., Forsberg, C. . Importance of immobilization after intraarticular glucocorticoid
treatment for elbow synovitis: a randomized controlled study. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken); May 2010.
286. Krogh, T. P., Fredberg, U., Stengaard-Pedersen, K., Christensen, R., Jensen, P., Ellingsen, T. .
Treatment of Lateral Epicondylitis With Platelet-Rich Plasma, Glucocorticoid, or Saline: A Randomized,
Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial. Am J Sports Med; Jan 17 2013.
287. Hayton, M. J., Santini, A. J., Hughes, P. J., Frostick, S. P., Trail, I. A., Stanley, J. K. . Botulinum toxin
injection in the treatment of tennis elbow. A double-blind, randomized, controlled, pilot study. J Bone
Joint Surg Am; Mar 2005.
288. Wong, S. M., Hui, A. C., Tong, P. Y., Poon, D. W., Yu, E., Wong, L. K. . Treatment of lateral
epicondylitis with botulinum toxin: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern
Med; Dec 6 2005.
289. Placzek, R., Drescher, W., Deuretzbacher, G., Hempfing, A., Meiss, A. L. . Treatment of chronic
radial epicondylitis with botulinum toxin A. A double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized
multicenter study. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Feb 2007.
290. Lin, Y. C., Tu, Y. K., Chen, S. S., Lin, I. L., Chen, S. C., Guo, H. R. . Comparison between botulinum
toxin and corticosteroid injection in the treatment of acute and subacute tennis elbow: a prospective,
randomized, double-blind, active drug-controlled pilot study. Am J Phys Med Rehabil; Aug 2010.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

209

291. Espandar, R., Heidari, P., Rasouli, M. R., Saadat, S., Farzan, M., Rostami, M., Yazdanian, S.,
Mortazavi, S. M. . Use of anatomic measurement to guide injection of botulinum toxin for the
management of chronic lateral epicondylitis: a randomized controlled trial. CMAJ; May 18 2010.
292. Kalichman, L., Bannuru, R. R., Severin, M., Harvey, W. . Injection of botulinum toxin for treatment
of chronic lateral epicondylitis: systematic review and meta-analysis. Semin Arthritis Rheum; Jun 2011.
293. Sampson, S., Gerhardt, M., Mandelbaum, B. . Platelet rich plasma injection grafts for
musculoskeletal injuries: a review. Curr Rev Musculoskelet Med; Dec 2008.
294. Mishra, A., Pavelko, T. . Treatment of chronic elbow tendinosis with buffered platelet-rich plasma.
Am J Sports Med; Nov 2006.
295. Mishra, A., Woodall, J.,Jr., Vieira, A. . Treatment of tendon and muscle using platelet-rich plasma.
Clin Sports Med; Jan 2009.
296. Foster, T. E., Puskas, B. L., Mandelbaum, B. R., Gerhardt, M. B., Rodeo, S. A. . Platelet-rich plasma:
from basic science to clinical applications. Am J Sports Med; Nov 2009.
297. Hall, M. P., Band, P. A., Meislin, R. J., Jazrawi, L. M., Cardone, D. A. . Platelet-rich plasma: current
concepts and application in sports medicine. J Am Acad Orthop Surg; Oct 2009.
298. de Vos, R. J., van Veldhoven, P. L., Moen, M. H., Weir, A., Tol, J. L., Maffulli, N. . Autologous growth
factor injections in chronic tendinopathy: a systematic review. Br Med Bull; 2010.
299. Thanasas, C, Papadimitriou, G, Charalambidis, C, Paraskevopoulos, I, Papanikolaou, A. Plateletrich plasma versus autologous whole blood for the treatment of chronic lateral elbow epicondylitis: a
randomized controlled clinical trial. Am J Sports Med; 2011.
300. Kazemi, M., Azma, K., Tavana, B., Rezaiee Moghaddam, F., Panahi, A. . Autologous blood versus
corticosteroid local injection in the short-term treatment of lateral elbow tendinopathy: a randomized
clinical trial of efficacy. Am J Phys Med Rehabil; Aug 2010.
301. Creaney, L., Wallace, A., Curtis, M., Connell, D. . Growth factor-based therapies provide additional
benefit beyond physical therapy in resistant elbow tendinopathy: a prospective, single-blind,
randomised trial of autologous blood injections versus platelet-rich plasma injections. Br J Sports Med;
Mar 28 2011.
302. Rabago, D., Best, T. M., Zgierska, A. E., Zeisig, E., Ryan, M., Crane, D. . A systematic review of four
injection therapies for lateral epicondylosis: prolotherapy, polidocanol, whole blood and platelet-rich
plasma. Br J Sports Med; Jul 2009.
303. Zeisig, E., Fahlstrom, M., Ohberg, L., Alfredson, H. . Pain relief after intratendinous injections in
patients with tennis elbow: results of a randomised study. Br J Sports Med; Apr 2008.
304. Petrella, R. J., Cogliano, A., Decaria, J., Mohamed, N., Lee, R. . Management of tennis elbow with
sodium hyaluronate periarticular injections. Sports Med Arthrosc Rehabil Ther Technol; 2010.
305. Akermark, C., Crone, H., Elsasser, U., Forsskahl, B. . Glycosaminoglycan polysulfate injections in
lateral humeral epicondylalgia: a placebo-controlled double-blind trial. Int J Sports Med; Apr 1995.
306. McShane, J. M., Shah, V. N., Nazarian, L. N. . Sonographically guided percutaneous needle
tenotomy for treatment of common extensor tendinosis in the elbow: is a corticosteroid necessary?.
J Ultrasound Med; Aug 2008.
307. Housner, J. A., Jacobson, J. A., Misko, R. . Sonographically guided percutaneous needle tenotomy
for the treatment of chronic tendinosis. J Ultrasound Med; Sep 2009.
308. Leppilahti, J., Raatikainen, T., Pienimaki, T., Hanninen, A., Jalovaara, P. . Surgical treatment of
resistant tennis elbow. A prospective, randomised study comparing decompression of the posterior

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

210

interosseous nerve and lengthening of the tendon of the extensor carpi radialis brevis muscle. Arch
Orthop Trauma Surg; Jun 2001.
309. Dunkow, P. D., Jatti, M., Muddu, B. N. . A comparison of open and percutaneous techniques in
the surgical treatment of tennis elbow. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Jul 2004.
310. Keizer, S. B., Rutten, H. P., Pilot, P., Morre, H. H., v Os, J. J., Verburg, A. D. . Botulinum toxin
injection versus surgical treatment for tennis elbow: a randomized pilot study. Clin Orthop Relat Res;
Aug 2002.
311. Nirschl, R. P. . Lateral extensor release for tennis elbow. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jun 1994.
312. Lo, M. Y., Safran, M. R. . Surgical treatment of lateral epicondylitis: a systematic review. Clin
Orthop Relat Res; Oct 2007.
313. Yerger, B., Turner, T. . Percutaneous extensor tenotomy for chronic tennis elbow: an office
procedure. Orthopedics; Oct 1985.
314. Bosworth, D. M. . Surgical treatment of tennis elbow; a follow-up study. J Bone Joint Surg Am;
Dec 1965.
315. Rosen, M. J., Duffy, F. P., Miller, E. H., Kremchek, E. J. . Tennis elbow syndrome: results of the
&quot;lateral release&quot; procedure. Ohio State Med J; Feb 1980.
316. Baumgard, S. H., Schwartz, D. R. . Percutaneous release of the epicondylar muscles for humeral
epicondylitis. Am J Sports Med; Jul-Aug 1982.
317. Khashaba, A. . Nirschl tennis elbow release with or without drilling. Br J Sports Med; Jun 2001.
318. Buchbinder, R., Green, S., Bell, S., Barnsley, L., Smidt, N., Assendelft, W. J. . Surgery for lateral
elbow pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2002.
319. Coleman, B., Quinlan, J. F., Matheson, J. A. . Surgical treatment for lateral epicondylitis: a longterm follow-up of results. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Apr 2010.
320. Buchbinder, R., Johnston, R. V., Barnsley, L., Assendelft, W. J., Bell, S. N., Smidt, N. . Surgery for
lateral elbow pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2011.
321. Goldberg, E. J., Abraham, E., Siegel, I. . The surgical treatment of chronic lateral humeral
epicondylitis by common extensor release. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Aug 1988.
322. Verhaar, J., Walenkamp, G., Kester, A., van Mameren, H., van der Linden, T. . Lateral extensor
release for tennis elbow. A prospective long-term follow-up study. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jul 1993.
323. Tan, P. K., Lam, K. S., Tan, S. K. . Results of modified Bosworth&#x27;s operation for persistent or
recurrent tennis elbow. Singapore Med J; Aug 1989.
324. Kumar, V. S., Shetty, A. A., Ravikumar, K. J., Fordyce, M. J. . Tennis elbow--outcome following the
Garden procedure: a retrospective study. J Orthop Surg; Dec 2004.
325. Peart, R. E., Strickler, S. S., Schweitzer, K. M.,Jr. . Lateral epicondylitis: a comparative study of
open and arthroscopic lateral release. Am J Orthop; Nov 2004.
326. Grundberg, A. B., Dobson, J. F. . Percutaneous release of the common extensor origin for tennis
elbow. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Jul 2000.
327. Owens, B. D., Murphy, K. P., Kuklo, T. R. . Arthroscopic release for lateral epicondylitis.
Arthroscopy; Jul 2001.
328. Baker, CL, Cummings, PD. Arthroscopic management of miscellaneous elbow disorders. Oper
Tech Sports Med; 1998.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

211

329. Baker, C. L.,Jr., Murphy, K. P., Gottlob, C. A., Curd, D. T. . Arthroscopic classification and treatment
of lateral epicondylitis: two-year clinical results. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Nov-Dec 2000.
330. Savoie, F. H.,3rd. Guidelines to becoming an expert elbow arthroscopist. Arthroscopy; Nov 2007.
331. Meknas, K., Odden-Miland, A., Mercer, J. B., Castillejo, M., Johansen, O. . Radiofrequency
microtenotomy: a promising method for treatment of recalcitrant lateral epicondylitis. Am J Sports
Med; Oct 2008.
332. Latko, W. A., Armstrong, T. J., Franzblau, A., Ulin, S. S., Werner, R. A., Albers, J. W. . Cross-sectional
study of the relationship between repetitive work and the prevalence of upper limb musculoskeletal
disorders. Am J Ind Med; Aug 1999.
333. Franzblau, A, Armstrong, TJ, Werner, RA, Ulin, SS. A cross-sectional assessment of the ACGIH TLV
for hand activity level. J Occup Rehabil; 2005.
334. Moore, JS, Garg, A. The Strain Index: a proposed method to analyze jobs for risk of distal upper
extremity disorders. Am Indus Hyg Assoc J; 1995.
335. Shell, D., Perkins, R., Cosgarea, A. . Septic olecranon bursitis: recognition and treatment. J Am
Board Fam Pract; May-Jun 1995.
336. Cardone, D. A., Tallia, A. F. . Diagnostic and therapeutic injection of the elbow region. Am Fam
Physician; Dec 1 2002.
337. Salzman, K. L., Lillegard, W. A., Butcher, J. D. . Upper extremity bursitis. Am Fam Physician; Nov 1
1997.
338. Weinstein, P. S., Canoso, J. J., Wohlgethan, J. R. . Long-term follow-up of corticosteroid injection
for traumatic olecranon bursitis. Ann Rheum Dis; Feb 1984.
339. Smith, D. L., McAfee, J. H., Lucas, L. M., Kumar, K. L., Romney, D. M. . Treatment of nonseptic
olecranon bursitis. A controlled, blinded prospective trial. Arch Intern Med; Nov 1989.
340. Tsai, T. M., Syed, S. A. . A transverse skin incision approach for decompression of pronator teres
syndrome. J Hand Surg Br; Feb 1994.
341. Morris, H. H., Peters, B. H. . Pronator syndrome: clinical and electrophysiological features in seven
cases. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry; May 1976.
342. Hartz, C. R., Linscheid, R. L., Gramse, R. R., Daube, J. R. . The pronator teres syndrome:
compressive neuropathy of the median nerve. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jul 1981.
343. Neal, S., Fields, K. B. . Peripheral nerve entrapment and injury in the upper extremity. Am Fam
Physician; Jan 15 2010.
344. Tsai, P., Steinberg, D. R. . Median and radial nerve compression about the elbow. Instr Course
Lect; 2008.
345. Dang, A. C., Rodner, C. M. . Unusual compression neuropathies of the forearm, part II: median
nerve. J Hand Surg Am; Dec 2009.
346. Rehak, D. C. . Pronator syndrome. Clin Sports Med; Jul 2001.
347. Lee, M. J., LaStayo, P. C. . Pronator syndrome and other nerve compressions that mimic carpal
tunnel syndrome. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther; Oct 2004.
348. Johnson, R. K., Spinner, M., Shrewsbury, M. M. . Median nerve entrapment syndrome in the
proximal forearm. J Hand Surg Am; Jan 1979.
349. Carlson, N., Logigian, E. L. . Radial neuropathy. Neurol Clin; Aug 1999.
350. Nakano, K. K. . Nerve entrapment syndromes. Curr Opin Rheumatol; Mar 1997.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

212

351. Plate, A. M., Green, S. M. . Compressive radial neuropathies. Instr Course Lect; 2000.
352. Henry, M., Stutz, C. . A unified approach to radial tunnel syndrome and lateral tendinosis. Tech
Hand Up Extrem Surg; Dec 2006.
353. Campbell, W. W., Landau, M. E. . Controversial entrapment neuropathies. Neurosurg Clin N Am;
Oct 2008.
354. Muhammed, N., Campbell, P., Smith, I. S. . Peripheral nerve entrapment syndromes: diagnosis
and management. Br J Hosp Med; Feb 15-28 1995.
355. Latinovic, R., Gulliford, M. C., Hughes, R. A. . Incidence of common compressive neuropathies in
primary care. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry; Feb 2006.
356. Moss, S. H., Switzer, H. E. . Radial tunnel syndrome: a spectrum of clinical presentations. J Hand
Surg Am; Jul 1983.
357. Konjengbam, M., Elangbam, J. . Radial nerve in the radial tunnel: anatomic sites of entrapment
neuropathy. Clin Anat; Jan 2004.
358. Cleary, C. K. . Management of radial tunnel syndrome: a therapist&#x27;s clinical perspective. J
Hand Ther; Apr-Jun 2006.
359. Stanley, J. . Radial tunnel syndrome: a surgeon&#x27;s perspective. J Hand Ther; Apr-Jun 2006.
360. Toussaint, C. P., Zager, E. L. . What&#x27;s new in common upper extremity entrapment
neuropathies. Neurosurg Clin N Am; Oct 2008.
361. Bencardino, J. T., Rosenberg, Z. S. . Entrapment neuropathies of the shoulder and elbow in the
athlete. Clin Sports Med; Jul 2006.
362. Roquelaure, Y., Raimbeau, G., Dano, C., Martin, Y. H., Pelier-Cady, M. C., Mechali, S., Benetti, F.,
Mariel, J., Fanello, S., Penneau-Fontbonne, D. . Occupational risk factors for radial tunnel syndrome in
industrial workers. Scand J Work Environ Health; Dec 2000.
363. Elhassan, B., Steinmann, S. P. . Entrapment neuropathy of the ulnar nerve. J Am Acad Orthop
Surg; Nov 2007.
364. Dawson, D. M. . Entrapment neuropathies of the upper extremities. N Engl J Med; Dec 30 1993.
365. Cutts, S. . Cubital tunnel syndrome. Postgrad Med J; Jan 2007.
366. Palmer, B. A., Hughes, T. B. . Cubital tunnel syndrome. J Hand Surg Am; Jan 2010.
367. Mondelli, M, Aretini, A, Rossi, S. Ulnar neuropathy at the elbow in diabetes. Am J Phys Med
Rehabil; 2009.
368. . Personal Communication, PREMUS, Zurich on July 13, 2004.
369. Descatha, A., Leclerc, A., Chastang, J. F., Roquelaure, Y. . Incidence of ulnar nerve entrapment at
the elbow in repetitive work. Scand J Work Environ Health; Jun 2004.
370. Andreisek, G., Crook, D. W., Burg, D., Marincek, B., Weishaupt, D. . Peripheral neuropathies of
the median, radial, and ulnar nerves: MR imaging features. Radiographics; Sep-Oct 2006.
371. Geutjens, G. G., Langstaff, R. J., Smith, N. J., Jefferson, D., Howell, C. J., Barton, N. J. . Medial
epicondylectomy or ulnar-nerve transposition for ulnar neuropathy at the elbow?. J Bone Joint Surg
Br; Sep 1996.
372. Svernlov, B., Larsson, M., Rehn, K., Adolfsson, L. . Conservative treatment of the cubital tunnel
syndrome. J Hand Surg Eur Vol; Apr 2009.
373. O'Connor, D., Marshall, S., Massy-Westropp, N. . Non-surgical treatment (other than steroid
injection) for carpal tunnel syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2003.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

213

374. Giele, H. Evidence-based treatment of carpal tunnel syndrome. Curr Orthop; 2001.
375. de Pablo, P, Katz, JN. Pharmacotherapy of carpal tunnel syndrome. Expert Opin Pharmacother;
2003.
376. Banta, C. A. . A prospective, nonrandomized study of iontophoresis, wrist splinting, and
antiinflammatory medication in the treatment of early-mild carpal tunnel syndrome. J Occup Med;
Feb 1994.
377. Celiker, R., Arslan, S., Inanici, F. . Corticosteroid injection vs. nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug
and splinting in carpal tunnel syndrome. Am J Phys Med Rehabil; Mar 2002.
378. Chang, M. H., Chiang, H. T., Lee, S. S., Ger, L. P., Lo, Y. K. . Oral drug of choice in carpal tunnel
syndrome. Neurology; Aug 1998.
379. Chang, M. H., Ger, L. P., Hsieh, P. F., Huang, S. Y. . A randomised clinical trial of oral steroids in
the treatment of carpal tunnel syndrome: a long term follow up. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry; Dec
2002.
380. Herskovitz, S., Berger, A. R., Lipton, R. B. . Low-dose, short-term oral prednisone in the treatment
of carpal tunnel syndrome. Neurology; Oct 1995.
381. Mishra, S., Prabhakar, S., Lal, V., Modi, M., Das, C. P., Khurana, D. . Efficacy of splinting and oral
steroids in the treatment of carpal tunnel syndrome: a prospective randomized clinical and
electrophysiological study. Neurol India; Sep 2006.
382. Wong, S. M., Hui, A. C., Tang, A., Ho, P. C., Hung, L. K., Wong, K. S., Kay, R., Li, E. . Local vs systemic
corticosteroids in the treatment of carpal tunnel syndrome. Neurology; Jun 12 2001.
383. Hui, A. C., Wong, S. M., Tang, A., Mok, V., Hung, L. K., Wong, K. S. . Long-term outcome of carpal
tunnel syndrome after conservative treatment. Int J Clin Pract; Apr 2004.
384. Hui, A. C., Wong, S. M., Wong, K. S., Li, E., Kay, R., Yung, P., Hung, L. K., Yu, L. M. . Oral steroid in
the treatment of carpal tunnel syndrome. Ann Rheum Dis; Aug 2001.
385. Ellis, J. M., Folkers, K., Levy, M., Shizukuishi, S., Lewandowski, J., Nishii, S., Schubert, H. A., Ulrich,
R. . Response of vitamin B-6 deficiency and the carpal tunnel syndrome to pyridoxine. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A; Dec 1982.
386. Spooner, G. R., Desai, H. B., Angel, J. F., Reeder, B. A., Donat, J. R. . Using pyridoxine to treat carpal
tunnel syndrome. Randomized control trial. Can Fam Physician; Oct 1993.
387. Stransky, M., Rubin, A., Lava, N. S., Lazaro, R. P. . Treatment of carpal tunnel syndrome with
vitamin B6: a double-blind study. South Med J; Jul 1989.
388. Guzman, FJL, Gonzalez-Buitrago, JM, de Arriba, F, Mateos, F, Moyano, JC, Lopez-Alburquerque,
T. Carpal tunnel syndrome and vitamin B6. Klin Wochenschr; 1989.
389. Keniston, R. C., Nathan, P. A., Leklem, J. E., Lockwood, R. S. . Vitamin B6, vitamin C, and carpal
tunnel syndrome. A cross-sectional study of 441 adults. J Occup Environ Med; Oct 1997.
390. Franzblau, A., Rock, C. L., Werner, R. A., Albers, J. W., Kelly, M. P., Johnston, E. C. . The relationship
of vitamin B6 status to median nerve function and carpal tunnel syndrome among active industrial
workers. J Occup Environ Med; May 1996.
391. Sato, Y., Honda, Y., Iwamoto, J., Kanoko, T., Satoh, K. . Amelioration by mecobalamin of subclinical
carpal tunnel syndrome involving unaffected limbs in stroke patients. J Neurol Sci; Apr 15 2005.
392. Nalamachu, S., Crockett, R. S., Gammaitoni, A. R., Gould, E. M. . A comparison of the lidocaine
patch 5% vs naproxen 500 mg twice daily for the relief of pain associated with carpal tunnel syndrome:
a 6-week, randomized, parallel-group study. MedGenMed; 2006.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

214

393. Nalamachu, S., Crockett, R. S., Mathur, D. . Lidocaine patch 5 for carpal tunnel syndrome: how it
compares with injections: a pilot study. J Fam Pract; Mar 2006.
394. Galer, B. S., Rowbotham, M. C., Perander, J., Friedman, E. . Topical lidocaine patch relieves
postherpetic neuralgia more effectively than a vehicle topical patch: results of an enriched enrollment
study. Pain; Apr 1999.
395. Poyhia, R., Vainio, A. . Topically administered ketamine reduces capsaicin-evoked mechanical
hyperalgesia. Clin J Pain; Jan 2006.
396. Gammaitoni, A., Gallagher, R. M., Welz-Bosna, M. . Topical ketamine gel: possible role in treating
neuropathic pain. Pain Med; Mar 2000.
397. Carter, R., Aspy, C. B., Mold, J. . The effectiveness of magnet therapy for treatment of wrist pain
attributed to carpal tunnel syndrome. J Fam Pract; Jan 2002.
398. Weintraub, M. I., Cole, S. P. . A randomized controlled trial of the effects of a combination of
static and dynamic magnetic fields on carpal tunnel syndrome. Pain Med; Jul-Aug 2008.
399. Szabo, R. M., Kwak, C. . Natural history and conservative management of cubital tunnel
syndrome. Hand Clin; Aug 2007.
400. Branco, K., Naeser, M. A. . Carpal tunnel syndrome: clinical outcome after low-level laser
acupuncture, microamps transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, and other alternative therapies-an open protocol study. J Altern Complement Med; Feb 1999.
401. Padua, L., Giannini, F., Girlanda, P., Insola, A., Luchetti, R., Lo Monaco, M., Padua, R., Uncini, A.,
Tonali, P. . Usefulness of segmental and comparative tests in the electrodiagnosis of carpal tunnel
syndrome: the Italian multicenter study. Italian CTS Study Group. Ital J Neurol Sci; Oct 1999.
402. Fitz-Ritson, D. Lasers and their therapeutic applications in chiropractic. J Can Chiropr Assoc; 2001.
403. Bakhtiary, A. H., Rashidy-Pour, A. . Ultrasound and laser therapy in the treatment of carpal tunnel
syndrome. Aust J Physiother; 2004.
404. Oztas, O., Turan, B., Bora, I., Karakaya, M. K. . Ultrasound therapy effect in carpal tunnel
syndrome. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Dec 1998.
405. Ebenbichler, G. R., Resch, K. L., Nicolakis, P., Wiesinger, G. F., Uhl, F., Ghanem, A. H., Fialka, V. .
Ultrasound treatment for treating the carpal tunnel syndrome: randomised &quot;sham&quot;
controlled trial. Br Med J; Mar 7 1998.
406. Curtis, BF. Traumatic ulnar neuritis; transplantation of the nerve. J Nerv Ment Dis; 1898.
407. Leffert, R. D. . Anterior submuscular transposition of the ulnar nerves by the Learmonth
technique. J Hand Surg Am; Mar 1982.
408. Gay, J. R., Love, J. G. . Diagnosis and treatment of tardy paralysis of the ulnar nerve; based on a
study of 100 cases. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Oct 1947.
409. Harrison, M. J., Nurick, S. . Results of anterior transposition of the ulnar nerve for ulnar neuritis.
Br Med J; Jan 3 1970.
410. King, T. . The treatment of traumatic ulnar neuritis; mobilization of the ulnar nerve at the elbow
by removal of the medial epicondyle and adjacent bone. Aust N Z J Surg; Aug 1950.
411. King, T, Morgan, FP. Late results of removing the medial humeral epicondyle for traumatic ulnar
neuritis. J Bone Joint Surg; 1970.
412. Learmonth, JR. A technique for transplanting the ulnar nerve. Surg Gynecol Obstet; 1942.
413. Levy, D. M., Apfelberg, D. B. . Results of anterior transposition for ulnar neuropathy at the elbow.
Am J Surg; Mar 1972.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

215

414. Catalano, L. W.,3rd, Barron, O. A. . Anterior subcutaneous transposition of the ulnar nerve. Hand
Clin; Aug 2007.
415. Macnicol, M. F. . The results of operation for ulnar neuritis. J Bone Joint Surg Br; May 1979.
416. Osborne, GV. The surgical treatment of tardy ulnar neuritis. J Bone Joint Surg Am; 1957.
417. Wadsworth, T. G. . Tennis elbow: conservative, surgical, and manipulative treatment. Br Med J
(Clin Res Ed); Mar 7 1987.
418. Wilson, D. H., Krout, R. . Surgery of ulnar neuropathy at the elbow: 16 cases treated by
decompression without transposition. Technical note. J Neurosurg; Jun 1973.
419. Adson, AW. The surgical treatment of progressive ulnar paralysis. Minnesota Med; 1918;.
420. McGowan, AJ. The results of transposition of the ulnar nerve for traumatic ulnar neuritis. J Bone
Joint Surg Br; Aug 1950.
421. Caliandro, P., La Torre, G., Padua, R., Giannini, F., Padua, L. . Treatment for ulnar neuropathy at
the elbow. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2011.
422. Abuelem, T., Ehni, B. L. . Minimalist cubital tunnel treatment. Neurosurgery; Oct 2009.
423. Waugh, R. P., Zlotolow, D. A. . In situ decompression of the ulnar nerve at the cubital tunnel. Hand
Clin; Aug 2007.
424. Macadam, S. A., Gandhi, R., Bezuhly, M., Lefaivre, K. A. . Simple decompression versus anterior
subcutaneous and submuscular transposition of the ulnar nerve for cubital tunnel syndrome: a metaanalysis. J Hand Surg Am; Oct 2008.
425. Gellman, H. . Compression of the ulnar nerve at the elbow: cubital tunnel syndrome. Instr Course
Lect; 2008.
426. Chung, K. C. . Treatment of ulnar nerve compression at the elbow. J Hand Surg Am; Nov 2008.
427. Osterman, A. L., Spiess, A. M. . Medial epicondylectomy. Hand Clin; Aug 2007.
428. Williams, E. H., Dellon, A. L. . Anterior submuscular transposition. Hand Clin; Aug 2007.
429. Merolla, G., Staffa, G., Paladini, P., Campi, F., Porcellini, G. . Endoscopic approach to cubital tunnel
syndrome. J Neurosurg Sci; Sep 2008.
430. Nabhan, A., Ahlhelm, F., Kelm, J., Reith, W., Schwerdtfeger, K., Steudel, W. I. . Simple
decompression or subcutaneous anterior transposition of the ulnar nerve for cubital tunnel syndrome.
J Hand Surg Br; Oct 2005.
431. Mowlavi, A., Andrews, K., Lille, S., Verhulst, S., Zook, E.G., Milner, S. . The management of cubital
tunnel syndrome: a meta-analysis of clinical studies. Plast Reconstr Surg; Aug 2000.
432. Macadam, S. A., Bezuhly, M., Lefaivre, K. A. . Outcomes measures used to assess results after
surgery for cubital tunnel syndrome: a systematic review of the literature. J Hand Surg Am; Oct 2009.
433. Ahcan, U., Zorman, P. . Endoscopic decompression of the ulnar nerve at the elbow. J Hand Surg
Am; Oct 2007.
434. Assmus, H, Antoniadis, G, Bischoff, C, Hoffmann, R, Martini, AK, Preissler, P, Scheglmann, K,
Schwerdtfeger, K, Wessels, KD, Wüstner-Hofmann, M. Cubital tunnel syndrome - a review and
management guidelines. Cent Eur Neurosurg; 2011.
435. Harris, J. S., Sinnott, P. L., Holland, J. P., Ording, J., Turkelson, C., Weiss, M., Hegmann, K. T. .
Methodology to update the practice recommendations in the American College of Occupational and
Environmental Medicine&#x27;s Occupational Medicine Practice Guidelines, second edition. J Occup
Environ Med; Mar 2008.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

216

436. Toker, S., Kilincoglu, V., Aksakalli, E., Gulcan, E., Ozkan, K. . Short-term results of treatment of
tennis elbow with anti-inflammatory drugs alone or in combination with local injection of a
corticosteroid and anesthetic mixture. Acta Orthop Traumatol Turc; May-Jul 2008.
437. Liow, R. Y., Cregan, A., Nanda, R., Montgomery, R. J. . Early mobilisation for minimally displaced
radial head fractures is desirable. A prospective randomised study of two protocols. Injury; Nov 2002.
438. Holdsworth, LK, Anderson, DM. Effectiveness of ultrasound used with a hydrocortisone coupling
medium or epicondylitis clasp to treat lateral epicondylitis: pilot study. Physiotherapy; 1993.
439. Clements, LG, Chow, S. Effectiveness of a custom-made below lateral counterforce splint in the
treatment of lateral epicondylitis (tennis elbow). Can J Occup Ther. ; 1993.
440. Jafarian, F. S., Demneh, E. S., Tyson, S. F. . The immediate effect of orthotic management on grip
strength of patients with lateral epicondylosis. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther; Jun 2009.
441. Ng, G. Y., Chan, H. L. . The immediate effects of tension of counterforce forearm brace on
neuromuscular performance of wrist extensor muscles in subjects with lateral humeral epicondylosis.
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther; Feb 2004.
442. Croisier, J. L., Foidart-Dessalle, M., Tinant, F., Crielaard, J. M., Forthomme, B. . An isokinetic
eccentric programme for the management of chronic lateral epicondylar tendinopathy. Br J Sports
Med; Apr 2007.
443. Tyler, T. F., Thomas, G. C., Nicholas, S. J., McHugh, M. P. . Addition of isolated wrist extensor
eccentric exercise to standard treatment for chronic lateral epicondylosis: a prospective randomized
trial. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Sep 2010.
444. Rompe, J. D., Riedel, C., Betz, U., Fink, C. . Chronic lateral epicondylitis of the elbow: A prospective
study of low-energy shockwave therapy and low-energy shockwave therapy plus manual therapy of
the cervical spine. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; May 2001.
445. Emanet, S. K., Altan, L. I., Yurtkuran, M. . Investigation of the effect of GaAs laser therapy on
lateral epicondylitis. Photomed Laser Surg; Jun 2010.
446. Reza Nourbakhsh, M., Fearon, F. J. . An alternative approach to treating lateral epicondylitis. A
randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blinded study. Clin Rehabil; Jul 2008.
447. Weng, C. S., Shu, S. H., Chen, C. C., Tsai, Y. S., Hu, W. C., Chang, Y. H. . The evaluation of two
modulated frequency modes of acupuncture-like TENS on the treatment of tennis elbow pain. Biomed
Eng Appl Basis Comm; 2005.
448. Van Leemput, T., Mahieu, G. . Conservative management of minimally displaced isolated
fractures of the ulnar shaft. Acta Orthop Belg; Dec 2007.
449. Warwick, L., Seradge, H. . Early versus late range of motion following cubital tunnel surgery. J
Hand Ther; Oct-Dec 1995.
450. Hong, C. Z., Long, H. A., Kanakamedala, R. V., Chang, Y. M., Yates, L. . Splinting and local steroid
injection for the treatment of ulnar neuropathy at the elbow: clinical and electrophysiological
evaluation. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Jun 1996.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

217

APPENDIX 1: LOW-QUALITY RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS AND
NON-RANDOMIZED STUDIES
The following low-quality randomized controlled studies (RCTs) and other non-randomized studies were
reviewed by the Evidence-based Practice Elbow Panel to be all inclusive, but were not relied upon for
purpose of developing this document’s guidance on treatments because they were not of high quality
due to one or more errors (e.g., lack of defined methodology, incomplete database searches, selective
use of the studies and inadequate or incorrect interpretation of the studies’ results, etc.), which may
render the conclusions invalid. ACOEM’s Methodology requires that only moderate- to high-quality
literature be used in making recommendations.(540)
LATERAL EPICONDYLALGIA
Author/Yea
r
Study Type

Scor
e (011)

Populatio
n

Comparison
Group

Results

Stull
1986

2.0

N = 38
with
“tennis
elbow”

Diflunisal
1,000mg
initially,
followed by
500mg BID vs.
500mg of
naproxen
initially,
followed by
250mg QID.

1.5

N = 18
with
lateral,
medial or
“posterior”
epicondylitis

Diflunisal
(initial dose of
diflunisal
1000mg
followed by
diflunisal
500mg every
12 hours for a
period of up to
15 days) vs.
naproxen.

Overall pain relief,
self reported favored
diflunisal (100% good
to excellent) vs
naproxen (71% good
to excellent), (p =
0.019). Self reported
elbow limitations
favored diflunisal, p =
0.039. No statistically
significant differences
between patients: 1)
overall elbow
condition; 2) overall
rating of elbow pain;
3) elbow flexion; 4)
elbow extension; 5)
pronation; 6)
supination; 7) pain
reduction; 8)
reduction in swelling;
and 9) reduction in
tenderness.
No statistically
significant differences
for any categories
between study drugs
or between pretest
and post-test results
at the fifth level single
tail distribution. One
patient receiving
diflunisal developed
transient nausea and
stomach cramps
though both study
agents were generally
well tolerated.

Conclusion

Comments

“[D]iflunisal and
naproxen significantly
reduce pain and
inflammation
associated with this
condition. However,
diflunisal provided
more effective pain
relief in the group
studied. Prompt pain
relief allows rapid
progression to
physical therapy and
a return to normal
activities. We also
believe that diflunisal
provides advantages
of a longer-lasting
effect and less
frequent dosing,
which may promote
better patient
compliance.”
“Diflunisal and
naproxen were
generally effective in
the treatment of mild
to moderate pain
associated with
epicondylitis; there
were no significant
differences between
the drugs.”

Open-label.
Randomization
unclear. Only
baseline
comparability of
groups that is given
relates to gender.
Tables only have 16
or 17 in each group,
as some participants
apparently did not
report. Most analyses
were not statistically
significant; however
there were small
numbers with multiple
individuals refusing to
answer questions,
which may be
sufficient to skew
results. No placebo
group.

NSAIDs

RCT

Adelaar
1987
RCT

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

Methods not well
described. Openlabel. Small study
population. Short
duration (15 days).
No placebo group.

218

Toker
2008

1.5

N=21with
lateral
elbow pain
with
confirmed
tennis
elbow
after
physical
examinati
on.

3.0

N=60
patients
with
Mason 1
and 2
radial
head
fractures

3.0

N = 33
with tennis
elbow
(pain,
tendernes
s and at
least 2 of
pain with
increased
grip/twist/
lift, pain
with
resisted

RCT

Liow 2002
RCT

Burton
1988
RCT

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

Depomedrol
Anti-inflammatory
“[S]ignificantly
1mL plus
group showed a
enhanced efficacy of
prilocaine 1mL significant
the combination
plus oral
improvement in pain
treatment used in this
diclofenac plus scores from before
study might be limited
topical
and after treatment
to the short-term and
etofenamate
(p=0.026). The
that adverse effects
cream (n=11)
injection group
of steroids on the
vs. oral and
showed a significant
tendons should be
topical antiimprovement as well
taken into
inflammatory
(p=0.003).
consideration.”
treatment
(n=10).
Topical NSAIDs and Other Agents
Immediate (24
VAS (mean±SD):
"[T]his study has
hours after
week 1 (group A
demonstrated the
injury) exercise 5.9±2.0 vs. group B
safety and early
program to
7.6±1.9), p=0.002;
benefit of immediate
restore elbow
week 4 and 12 (NS).
active mobilization in
movement
ROM: extension
Mason 1 and 2 radial
(group A,
deficit (NS); flexion
head fractures. We
n=30) vs. 5
week 1 (group A
have also shown that
day rest in
112±14.9 vs. group B
a delay of 5 days
broad arm
98±14.2), p=0.0004;
before mobilization
sling before
week 4 and 12 (NS);
was not detrimental
exercise
supination (NS);
and the final outcome
program
pronation (NS). Elbow of the two groups
(group B,
strength and grip
were similar."
n=30). Follow
strength: extension
ups at 1, 4
(NS); flexion (NS);
weeks, and 3
supination week 1
months.
(58±2.9 vs. 47±2.2,
p=0.0022), week 4
and 12 (NS);
pronation (NS); grip
strength (NS). Morrey
Score: pain week 1
(10.3 vs. 6.3,
p=0.009), week 4 and
12 (NS); ROM (NS);
strength week 1 (16.1
vs. 14.7, p=0.035),
week 4 and 12 (NS);
function week 1 (8.2
vs. 5.4, p=0.012),
week 4 and 12 (NS);
total score week 1
(54.4 vs. 43.5,
p=0.005), week 4 and
12 (NS).
All received
“The results do not
manual
show any therapeutic
therapy, 2
advantage from the
times a week
use of these adjuncts,
for 1st week,
when assessed over
then 1 times a
three weeks, though
week. Strap
the majority of
(Chen strap)
patients in all groups
all day vs.
were significantly
benzydamine
improved.”
topical cream 5
times a day vs.
strap plus

Sparse details.
Unknown follow-up
duration. No
medication doses
provided.

Quasi-randomized by
provider preference
(next available
fracture clinic). Data
support early
mobilization for
minimally displaced
fx.

Sparse details. Small
sample sizes among
4 groups. No short or
longer term followup.
Likely underpowered
for differences,
especially in relatively
acute population with
better prognoses.

219

Kroll
1989

2.5

RCT

MF
extension,
pain with
pronation/
wrist
flexion).
Duration
<3 months
(mean 4.8
weeks).

NSAID cream.
No follow-up
beyond 3 week
trial.

N = 173
acute
musculoskeletal
disorders,
mean 2-5
days (not
well
described
proportion
s of:
sprains
and
tendinitis
of ankle
sprain, AC
joint
sprain,
supraspinatus
tendinitis,
Achilles
tendinitis,
epicondylitis)

Piroxicam
0.5% gel (3 cm
of gel
corresponding
to 5 mg
piroxicam) QID
vs. diclofenac
1.16% (5 to 10
cm of gel
corresponding
to 20 to 40 mg
diclofenac)
QID for up to
14 days.

“Restriction of active
movement”
(baseline/2/4days):
piroxicam
(50.0±2.77/34.2±2.26/
15.0±2.39) vs.
diclofenac
(50.9±2.92/37.8±2.63/
9.8±1.81). Reductions
in mean pain scores
on joint movement,
and tenderness also
NS.

“The results of this
study show that
piroxicam 0.5% gel
and diclofenac 1.16%
gel are equally
effective and well
tolerated in the
treatment of selected
acute sprains and
tendonitis.”

Open label. Many
disorders. Short term
(therapy was begun
within 3-5 days of
injury and continued
for up to 14 days).
Study did not
differentiate results by
injury location (i.e.,
elbow, ankle, or
shoulder), only by
treatment (piroxicam
vs. diclofenac) and
injury type (sprains
and tendinitis). Data
suggest equal
efficacy.

Tennis Elbow Straps, Bands, Supports, and Braces
Luginbühl
2008

3.5

N = 36
enrolled,
but 6
dropped
out. 29 (30
elbows)
with tennis
elbow with
no more
than 3
injections
in the prior
6 months.

All started with
2-3mL injection
Triamcinolone/
Kenacort 40mg
plus 1%
Scandicain.
Forearm
support band
vs. progressive
isometric
strengthening
exercises vs
combination.

3.0

N = 36
with lateral
epicondylits,
duration 2
weeks to
18 months

Ultrasound
(3MHz, 1.5W/
cm2) with
aqua-sonic
100 vs.
phonophoresis
(ultrasound
with
hydrocortisone
1% cream with
dimethicone
330 2%) vs.

RCT

Holdsworth
1993
RCT

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

Mean modified
Nirschl Pettrone
scores (pre/ last):
Band (3.7±0.7/
2.6±1.4) vs. exercise
(3.4±0.7/1.7±1.3) vs.
combination (3.1±0.7/
1.8±1.4) NS.
Subjective
improvements of
much better or better
in 5/5 (50%) vs. 7/10
(70%) vs. 7/10 (70%).
No differences in grip
strength (p = 0.29).
Mean subjective
scores of pain at rest
(pre/post): US 5.6/5.1
vs. Phono 14.3/12.2
vs. US plus clasp
5.6/7.8 vs. phono plus
clasp 6.1/5.8. (Graph
and data do not
match. Graph
suggests phono plus
clasp far worse, but
data suggest phono

“[W]e could not show
any beneficial effect
either for the forearm
support band or for
the strengthening
exercises.”

Trial consists of fairly
resistant cases, thus
generalizability of
results may be
similarly limited. High
dropouts at year 1.
Trend towards worse
cases at baseline for
band then exercise,
may bias in favor of
combination.

“Our study has
confirmed that
ultrasound treatment
does bring about a
favourable response
in the majority of
patients. We found no
suggestion that the
application of a
hydrocortisone
coupling medium
enhanced this

Small group sizes.
Unclear if blinded
(“independent”)
assessor. If so, study
is moderate quality by
score. Data suggest
equivalency, but are
likely underpowered
for effects.

220

Burton
1988

3.0

RCT

Altan
2008

3.0

Pseudorandomized
clinical trial

Clements
1993
Pseudorandomized
clinical trial

2.5

N = 33
tennis
elbow
(pain,
tendernes
s; at least
2 of pain
with
increased
grip/twist/
lift, pain
with
resisted
MF
extension,
pain with
pronation/
wrist
flexion).
Duration
<3 months
(mean 4.8
weeks).
N = 50
(ages 3460) with
diagnosis
of lateral
epicondylit
is (lateral
elbow
pain,
tendernes
s, pain
with
resisted
wrist
dorsiflexion).
Duration
less than
12 weeks.

N = 16
workers
performing
repetitive
tasks with
lateral epicondylitis

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

ultrasound with
clasp vs.
phonophoresis
with clasp. 12
treatments
over maximum
6 weeks.
All received
manual
therapy, 2
times a week
for 1st week,
then once a
week. Strap
(Chen strap)
all day vs.
Benzydamine
topical cream 5
times a day vs.
strap plus
NSAID cream.
No follow-up
beyond 3 week
trial.

alone did worse).

favourable response.”

Mean pain scores
(pre/3 days/1 week/3
weeks): Strap plus
NSAID
(3.6/2.8/2.5/1.5) vs.
NSAID cream
(3.0/2.5/1.7/1.0) vs.
Strap (3.2/2.8/2.5/1.6)
vs. Manipulation only
(3.2/2.8/2.5/1.5).

“The results do not
show any therapeutic
advantage from the
use of these adjuncts,
when assessed over
three weeks, though
the majority of
patients in all groups
were significantly
improved.”

Sparse details. Small
sample sizes among
4 groups. No short or
longer term followup.
Likely underpowered
for differences,
especially in relatively
acute population with
better prognoses.

Lateral
epicondyle
bandage vs
wrist splint
(Rehband). To
be worn
“continuously”;
6 weeks followup.

Good responses at 2
and 6 weeks in 33.3%
vs. 48% and at 6
weeks in 66.7% vs.
72% (NS). Lateral
epicondyle bandage
improved in all
parameters (Pain at
rest, pain with
movement, sensitivity,
algometer score, and
hand grip strength) at
6 weeks. Wrist splint
group also showed a
significant
improvement in all
parameters by 6
weeks. No differences
between groups other
than at 2 weeks,
where wrist splint
favored.
Reported less pain,
and grip-affected arm
strength also better in
splint plus PT group.
(minimal data
provided).

“[E]picondyle
bandage was not
found to be superior
to wrist splint in our
study, we may
suggest that it could
be favored over splint
since it is more
practical and
cosmetically
acceptable.”

Every other
allocation. Mostly
subacute patients
(mean ~6 weeks).
Data mostly suggest
wrist splint and lateral
epicondyle bandage
equally efficacious.

“[T]his custom-made
splint is of value in
facilitating the
recovery from lateral
epicondylitis.”

Pseudorandomized
(every other). States
to be worn at night
and daytime, but
compliance numbers
indicate worn less
than 50% as directed.
Sparse results. Small
numbers of subjects.

Custom-made
splint plus
physiotherapy
(US, ice
stretch,
strengthening)
vs. physiotherapy alone.
PT 3 times a
week; 4 weeks
follow-up.

221

Garg
2010

2.0

RCT

Dwars
1990

1.5

RCT

Jafarian
2009

N/A

N=52
patients
with lateral
epicondylit
is for at
least 3
months.

N/A

N=15
patients
with lateral
humeral
epicondylit
is in their
dominant
arm.

Experiment
al,
Randomize
d
Crossover
Study.

Ng 2004
Experiment
al Study

N = 70
lateral epicondylitis,
42 (44
elbow) not
lost to
follow-up;
acute
patients
(duration
not
described)
N = 120
patients
with tennis
elbow

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

“The wrist extension
splint allows a greater
degree of pain relief
than does the forearm
strap brace for
patients with lateral
epicondylitis.”

Many details sparse.
High dropouts.
Baseline data sparse
and suggest
differences may be
present. Most results
suggest no difference
between treatments.

Elbow support
No difference
“[T]he favorable
(Epitrain) worn
between groups for
results warrant the
all day (n = 60) pain changes.
use of the elbow
vs. physical
Patients with elbow
support for the
therapy
support more
treatment of tennis
(friction
satisfied vs. physical
elbow.”
massage plus
therapy group.
stretching) (n =
60) for 6
weeks
Splints – Experimental Studies
All patients
Both elbow orthoses
"The use of the 2
used a
and wrist orthosis
types of elbow
placebo,
superior for pain-free
orthoses (strap and
counterforce
grip strength vs.
sleeve) resulted in an
elbow strap,
placebo
immediate increase in
counterforce
(p<0.02).Values for
pain-free grip
elbow sleeve,
pain-free grip were
strength."
and a wrist
135±77 (22-404) for
splint in a
placebo, 156±88 (20randomized
466) for elbow strap,
order.
156±91 (14-440) for
elbow sleeve, and
129±74 (17-387) for
wrist splint, p≤0.003.
The values for the
maximum grip were
161±95 (28-510) for
placebo, 174±97 (22567) for elbow strap,
175±95 (22-484) for
elbow sleeve, and
142±73 (13-369) for
wrist splint.
Control vs.
For within-subject
"The counterforce
brace without
effect of brace
forearm brace had no
tension vs.
significant (p=0.01).
effect on isokinetic
brace with 25
Univariate tests
wrist extensor
N of tension vs revealed significant
strength and stretch
brace with 50
differences for wrist
reflex latency of the
N of tension.
proprioception
extensor carpi ulnaris
(p=0.032) and
muscle in subjects
passive wrist
with lateral humeral
extensors stretching
epicondylitis."
pain threshold
(P=0.05). Mean±SD
joint position error
comparing no brace
vs. brace 0N vs.
brace 25N vs. brace
50N: 0.5±4.6 vs.

Many details sparse.
Results suggest
support as effective
as physical therapy.

Velcro elbow
strap vs.
thumb spica
wrist extension
splint; 6 weeks
follow-up.

American Shoulder
and Elbow Society
scores (pre/post):
elbow strap
(35.2±16.9/51.119.0)
vs. wrist splint
(40.7±25.2/54.3±16.6,
p = 0.60).

No follow-up as
experimental only.
Data suggest elbow
strap or sleeve may
be superior to wrist
splint or brace for
pain free grip,
however, without
clinical follow-up, no
firm conclusions for
treatment possible.

Experimental Study.
No clinical follow-up.
Data suggest
counterforce brace
increases pain
threshold to passive
stretch. Clinical
relevance uncertain.

222

0.3±5.0 vs. 2.4±4.9
(p<0.05) vs. 0.7±4.8;
p<0.32.

Exercise
Luginbühl
2008

3.5

N = 36
enrolled (6
dropped
out); 29
(30
elbows)
with tennis
elbow with
no more
than 3
injections
in prior 6
months.

All 2-3mL
injection
triamcinolone/
Kenacort 40mg
plus 1%
Scandicain.
Forearm
support band
vs. progressive
isometric
strengthening
exercises vs.
combination.

2.5

N=92 with
unilateral
chronic
lateral
epicondyla
r
tendinopath
y.

2.5

N=21 with
chronic
lateral
epicondyliti
s for 6
weeks or
longer.

Passive
standard
rehabilitation
program
(control group)
(n=46) vs.
passive
standard
rehabilitation
plus eccentric
strength
exercises
(n=46).
Eccentric
training (n=11)
vs. standard
treatment
(n=10).

2.5

N = 16
workers
performing
repetitive
tasks with
lateral epicondylitis.

RCT

Croisier
2007
Quasi
Randomize
d

Tyler 2010
RCT

Clements
1993
Pseudorandomized
clinical

Custom-made
splint plus
physiotherapy
(US, ice
stretch,
strengthening)
vs. physiotherapy alone.
PT 3 times a
week; 4 weeks
follow-up.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

Mean modified
Nirschl Pettrone
scores (pre/ last):
band (3.7±0.7/2.6
±1.4) vs. exercise
(3.4± 0.7/1.7±1.3) vs.
combination (3.1±0.7/
1.8±1.4), NS.
Subjective
improvements of
much better or better
in 5/5 (50%) vs. 7/10
(70%) vs. 7/10 (70%).
No differences in grip
strength (p = 0.29).
By end of treatment,
treatment group had
a significantly lower
VAS pain score
compared to control
(p<0.001). After
treatment both groups
improved in disability,
but treatment group
improved significantly
compared to control
(p<0.001).

“[W]e could not show
any beneficial effect
either for the forearm
support band or for
the strengthening
exercises.”

Trial consists of fairly
resistant cases, thus
generalizability of
results may be
similarly limited. High
dropouts at year 1.
Trend towards worse
cases at baseline for
band then exercise,
may bias in favor of
combination.

“[A] patient with
chronic lateral
epicondylar
tendinopathy has
more than two times
a greater chance of
obtaining relief with
eccentric
intervention.”

Quasi randomized
with matching on age,
gender and activity
level. Timing appears
variable. Many details
sparse.

The eccentric group
improved significantly
in DASH (p=0.01),
VAS pain (p=0.002),
combined strength
(p=0.011), and
tenderness deficit
(p=0.003) compared
to the standard group.

“All outcome
measures for chronic
lateral epicondylitis
were markedly
improved with the
addition of an
eccentric wrist
extensor exercise to
standard physical
therapy, compared
with physical therapy
without the isolated
eccentric exercise.”
“[T]his custom-made
splint is of value in
facilitating the
recovery from lateral
epicondylitis.”

Small groups. Many
details sparse. Data
suggest eccentric
group modestly
superior.

Reported less pain,
and grip-affected arm
strength also better in
splint plus PT group.
(minimal data
provided).

Pseudorandomized
(every other). States
to be worn at night
and daytime, but
compliance numbers
indicate worn less
than 50% as directed.
Sparse results. Small
number of subjects.

223

Svernlöv
2001

2.0

N = 38
with lateral
epicondylalgia. All
lateral
elbow
pain,
tender to
palpation,
pain with
resisted
wrist
extension,
positive
middle
finger test.
Mean
durations
8.4 to 10.7
months.
N = 120
patients
with tennis
elbow

Group S
(stretching,
contract-relaxstretching
program) vs.
Group E
(eccentric,
eccentric
exercises).
Daily HEP
exercises for
12 weeks.
Forearm bands
with activity
and wrist
support nightly
in both groups.
12months
follow-up.

3.0

N = 36 with
lateral epicondylitis.
Duration 2
weeks-18
months.

2.0

N = 48 with
lateral epicondylitis
(pain over
common
extensor
origin with
resisted
wrist
extension
and point
tenderness
over

Ultrasound
(3MHz,
1.5W/cm2) with
aquasonic 100
vs.
phonophoresis
(ultrasound
with
hydrocortisone
1% cream with
dimethicone
330 2%) vs.
ultrasound with
clasp vs.
phonophoresis
with clasp; 12
treatments
over maximum
6 weeks.
Ultrasound
with coupling
agent vs.
ultrasound with
10%
hydrocortisone
coupling agent
vs.
transcutaneou
s electrical
nerve
stimulation vs.
hydrocortisone

RCT

Dwars
1990

1.5

RCT

Holdsworth
1993
RCT

Halle
1986
RCT

Elbow support
(Epitrain) worn
all day (n = 60)
vs. physical
therapy
(friction
massage plus
stretching) (n =
60) for 6
weeks.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

“The eccentric
training regime can
considerably reduce
symptoms in a
majority of patients
with lateral humeral
epicondylalgia,
regardless of
duration, and is
possibly superior to
conventional
stretching.”

Pilot study. Some
baseline differences,
including steroid
injections (4/15 vs.
9/15). Baseline table
is of completions.
Data suggest
eccentric exercises
superior to stretching.

“[T]he favorable
results warrant the
use of the elbow
support for the
treatment of tennis
elbow.”

Many details sparse.
Results suggest
support as effective
as physical therapy.

Ultrasound
Mean subjective
scores of pain at rest
(pre/post): US 5.6/5.1
vs. Phono 14.3/12.2
vs. US plus clasp
5.6/7.8 vs. phono plus
clasp 6.1/5.8. (Graph
and data do not
match. Graph
suggests phono plus
clasp far worse, but
data suggest phono
alone did worse).

“Our study has
confirmed that
ultrasound treatment
does bring about a
favourable response
in the majority of
patients. We found no
suggestion that the
application of a
hydrocortisone
coupling medium
enhanced this
favourable response.”

Small group sizes.
Unclear if blinded
(“independent”)
assessor. If so, study
is moderate quality by
score. Data suggest
equivalency, but are
likely underpowered
for effects.

Pain Intensity Index:
US 16.5 vs. US with
hydrocortisone 13.5
vs. TENS 1.5 vs.
Injection 2.5 (latter 3
p<0.05). Pain rating
index total: US 7.5 vs.
US with
hydrocortisone 16.0
vs. TENS 7.0 vs.
Injection 3.0 (all but
US with
hydrocortisone

“While no difference
was demonstrated to
exist between the four
treatment protocols, it
was shown that
improvement, as
measured by the pain
indexes, did occur
over all four treatment
groups when the pretreatment and posttreatment values
were compared.”

Much of study not
well described. No
placebo. Short follow
up (5 days). Poor
blinding, though
ultrasound attempted
blinding. No
description of
randomization/
confounders – no
discussion of
individual group
demographics. One-

Mean VAS scores
before training vs.
after 3 months: At
rest: 0.9 vs. 0.1; p
<0.0001. At palpation:
5.0 vs. 2.3; p
<0.0001. Pain on
isometric testing: 5.3
vs. 1.3; p = 0.0002.
Pain during middle
finger test: 5.5 vs.
2.4; p <0.0001. Pain
during grip strength
testing: 2.9 vs. 0.6; p
<0.0001. Complete
recovery in 12/17
(71%) of eccentric
exercise vs. 7/18
(39%) stretching, p =
0.09.
No difference
between groups for
pain changes.
Patients with elbow
support more
satisfied vs. physical
therapy group.

224

epicondyle)

FernándezCarnero
2008

3.5

N = 10 with
lateral epicondylitis
ages 30 to
49 years
who
responded
to a local
advertisem
ent;
duration
unclear.

3.5

N= 6 with
chronic
lateral
epicondyliti
s for at
least 6
months and
diagnosed
by at least
2 of the
following
tests:
palpation,
resisted
wrist
extension,
resisted
finger
extension,
and
resisted
extension
of the
middle
finger. 12
week study
with 4
follow-ups.

RCT

Radpasand
2009
RCT

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

and lidocaine
p<0.05). Comparing
injection.
pre/post tests: US
Treatment
69% of variables
details not
improved, 12% same,
provided.
and 19% worse. US
Treatments
with hydrocortisone
QD for 5 days
65% improved, 12 %
except
same, 23% worse.
injection. All
TENS 56% improved,
treated with
23% same, 21%
elbow cuff,
worse. Injections 63%
avoiding
improved, 25% same,
strenuous
12% worse.
activity, ice
massage BID;
5 days
treatment.
Manipulation and Mobilization
Cervical spine
Both groups similar
“No significant
manipulation
pain threshold values
changes for HPT and
(high velocity,
for dominant (p =
CPT were found.
low amplitude
0.2)/nondominant (p
Finally, cervical
thrust
= 0.3). Hot pain
manipulation
manipulation
thresholds not
increased PFG on the
directed at C5different for dominant
affected side, but not
6) vs. manual
(p = 0.8)/
the MGF on the
contact
nondominant (p =
unaffected arm.”
(simulated, but
0.4). Cold pain
no thrust). No
thresholds similar,
follow-up
dominant (p = 0.8)
beyond 2
and nondominant (p =
treatments
0.7). Pain free grip
(about 48
not different between
hours).
groups (p = 0.3).
Group A (n=4):
Group A vs. Group B: “The pilot study
high-velocity
59% vs. 9.5% change demonstrated that the
low-amplitude
for PRTEE (Patientstudy design is
manipulation
Rated Tennis Elbow
feasible and that
(delivered as a
Evaluation) total, 3.2
patients could be
HVLA thrust),
% vs. 169.0% change recruited for a 12high-voltage
for PFGS (Pain-Free
week trial of
pulse galvanic
Grip Strength), and
multimodal treatment.
stimulation,
51.4% vs. 65.1%
A large trial is
counterforce
VAS_24hs.
warranted in a
bracing (used
multicenter setting to
hard pad’s knob
detect difference in
exactly located
the effects of these
on top of most
treatment strategies.”
painful area),
ice (applied ice
for 10 minutes
and removed
for 15 minutes.
Repeated twice
3 times per
day), and
exercises
(forearm
supinator and
pronator
muscles;
forearm
extensor and
flexor muscle

tailed t-tests.
Conclusions of lack of
differences between
groups appear likely
underpowered and
incorrect.

Inadequate sample
size. Study design
somewhat unclear as
possible crossover
trial. No short or
intermediate term
results. Results
suggest no
differences, but likely
underpowered if there
is an effect.

The direct aim of this
study is not about the
effectiveness of the
treatments. Small
sample size with
uneven numbers in
the groups. Pilot
study.

225

Drechsler
1997

3.0

N = 18 with
lateral epicondylitis
(criteria
unclear).
Duration
unclear.

3.0

N = 33 with
tennis
elbow
(pain,
tenderness,
at least 2 of
pain with
increased
grip/twist/
lift, pain
with

RCT

Burton
1988
RCT

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

exercise,
forearm
supinator and
pronator
muscle
exercise, and
putty
therapeutic
exercise.
Contractions
performed for
10 seconds
with 10
repetitions twice
a day) vs.
Group B (n=2)
with ultrasound
(3 MHz, 1.5
W/cm2, and
pulsed mode of
1 millisecond
on and 5
milliseconds off
for 8 minutes),
counterforce
bracing, and
exercise.
Neural tension
group (mobilize
radial head
with wrist
flexion/
shoulder
abduction;
anteriorposterior
mobilizations)
plus HEP vs.
standard
treatment (US
1.0-1.5W/cm2,
3MHz, 5
minutes;
transverse
friction
massage,
stretching,
strengthening,
HEP). Average
2 times a week
6 weeks; 3
months followup.
All received
manual
therapy, 2
times a week
for first week,
then once a
week. Strap
(Chen strap)
all day vs.
Benzydamine
topical cream 5

Occupational status
(pre/post/3 month):
NT (2.0/1.5/1.23) vs.
standard
(1.5/1.6/1.5). Grip
strengths NT
(73.25/85.12/87.12)
vs. standard
(92.6/97.7/92.5).

“Results of the NTG
(neural tension group)
treatment were linked
to the radial head
treatment, and
isolated effects of the
NTG treatment could
not be determined.
There were no longterm positive results
in the (standard
treatment group).”

Small sample sizes
that preclude quality
assessments.
Baseline differences
(e.g., mean grips 73
vs. 92 pounds).
Multiple cointerventions. All
received HEP. No
placebo/sham control.

Mean pain scores
(pre/3 days/1 week/3
weeks): Strap plus
NSAID
(3.6/2.8/2.5/1.5) vs.
NSAID cream
(3.0/2.5/1.7/1.0) vs.
Strap (3.2/2.8/2.5/1.6)
vs. Manipulation only
(3.2/2.8/2.5/1.5).

“The results do not
show any therapeutic
advantage from the
use of these adjuncts,
when assessed over
three weeks, though
the majority of
patients in all groups
were significantly
improved.”

Sparse details. Small
sample sizes among
4 groups. No short or
longer term follow-up.
Likely underpowered
for differences,
especially in relatively
acute population with
better prognoses.

226

Nourbakhs
h
2008

2.5

RCT

Dwars
1990

1.5

N = 120
patients
with tennis
elbow

3.5

N = 41 with
lateral epicondylitis

RCT

Melegati
2004

resisted MF
extension,
pain with
pronation/
wrist
flexion).
Duration
less than 3
months
(mean 4.8
weeks).
N = 23 (age
24-72) with
lateral epicondylitis;
duration at
least 3
months
(means 17
and 20
months).

RCT

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

times a day vs.
strap plus
NSAID cream.
No follow-up
beyond 3 week
trial.

Oscillatingenergy manual
therapy
(OMET) vs
placebo
(sham). 6
treatments
over 2 to 3
weeks. No
subsequent
follow-up in
both groups.

Grip strengths
(pre/post: OMET
(61.3/73.6) vs. sham
(81.1/79.2). OMET
with improved pain
intensity (p = 0.000),
functional level (p =
0.000), and pain
limited activity (p =
0.004). Placebo
group did not
improve.

“[O]MET could
significantly improve
the symptoms of
chronic LE in a
relatively short period
of time.”

Massage, Including Friction Massage
Elbow support
No difference between “[T]he favorable
(Epitrain) worn
groups for pain
results warrant the
all day (n = 60) changes. Patients with use of the elbow
vs. physical
elbow support more
support for the
therapy
satisfied vs. physical
treatment of tennis
(friction
therapy group.
elbow.”
massage plus
stretching) (n =
60) for 6
weeks
Extracorporeal Shockwave Therapy
Extracorporeal
shockwave
therapy with
lateral
tangential
focusing vs.
back tangential
focusing.

No statistically
significant difference
between groups in
initial TESS and VAS
(p >0.05), but both
groups did make a
significant increase in
TESS follow up
scores (p <0.05) and
significant decrease
in VAS (p <0.05).

“According to TESS
and VAS scores both
localization
techniques gave a
decrease of
symptoms but did not
eliminate the pain.”
“There was no
difference between
the two techniques of
using ESWT.”

Unclear how 2 RCTs
run simultaneously.
Trial claims double
blinding, but patient
blinding not plausible
when manual therapy
differed.
Blinding/sham
adequacy not
assessed; small
sample, unclear how
many drops. Major
baseline difference in
grip strength
suggests
randomization failure.
Reductions in grip
strength posttreatment
unexplained.
Many details sparse.
Results suggest
support as effective
as physical therapy.

Confounders
addressed age,
gender, duration of
symptoms. No
placebo group.
Evaluations compiled
by same physician
who performed
ESWT. No drop outs.
Did not state intentto-treat analysis. No
difference between
techniques.

227

Rompe
2001

3.5

N = 60
diagnosed
with lateral
epicondyliti
s who did
not respond
to
conservativ
e treatment
for 6
months or
longer.

2.5

N = 74 with
chronic
lateral epicondylitis
awaiting
surgery

2.0

N = 93 with
tennis
elbow

Prospective
RCT/
Matched
Prospective
Trial

Melikyan
2003
RCT

Crowther
2002
RCT

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

30 patients
received 1000
impulses of
shock waves
once a week
for 3 weeks
and also
received
manual
therapy to the
cervical spine
(group 1) vs.
30 patients
received 1000
impulses of
shock waves
once a week
for 3 weeks
(group 2) with
follow-ups at 3
months and 12
months.
Extracorporeal
shockwave
therapy vs.
sham. 12
months followup.

Steroid
injection
(triamcinolone
20mg plus
lignocaine) vs.
extracorporeal
shockwave
therapy; 3
months followup.

At 3 months, 12
patients in group 1
and 15 patients in
group 2 had an
excellent or good
condition. At 12
months, 15 patients in
group 1 and 15
patients in group 2
had a good or
excellent condition.
No significant
differences found
between two groups.
Within the 2 groups,
significant difference
in the improvement
on the VAS and on
Roles and Maudsley
outcome scores at
both follow-ups
(p<0.001)
No difference
between groups at
any point or in rate of
improvement of score
(p = 0.87). Mean pain
on lifting 5kg
dumbbell decreased
significantly over time
in both groups (p
<0.001), NS between
groups. Grip strength
with elbow flexed 90
and arm adducted
(M1) not improved in
either group
(baseline, 29.5kg; 12
months, 34.2kg, p =
0.22). Mean grip
strength (M2)
improved (baseline,
21.2kg; 12 months,
32.4kg; p <0.001). No
difference between
groups before
treatment (p = 0.77
and p = 0.93, for M1/
M2) or follow-up (p =
0.38 and p = 0.65).
Group 1 (steroid
injection); 6 weeks
after injection, mean
VAS fell from pretreatment level of 67
to 21, and at 3 months
12. Group 2 (ESWT)
VAS score fell from 61
before treatment to 35
at 6 weeks after end
of treatment (tailed ttest, p = 0.052) and to
31 at 3 months. Using
a reduction of pain of

The authors
concluded "ESWT
may be an effective
conservative
treatment for
unilateral chronic
tennis elbow. The
efficacy of additional
cervical manual
therapy for lateral
epicondylitis remains
questionable."

Many details sparse.
Data suggest cervical
manipulation of no
additive benefit to
ESWT.

“We have not been
able to show a
significant difference
between the
treatment and the
control groups in
respect of any of the
measured parameters
at this dosage.”
“Study showed no
evidence that
extracorporeal shockwave therapy for
tennis elbow is better
than placebo.”

Confounders
addressed age,
gender, and use of
analgesics. Both
treatment and
placebo trended
towards
improvement. There
was no difference in
the proportion of
patients using
analgesics at any
stage.

“Our results have
shown that injection
of steroid and local
anaesthetic was more
effective than ESWT
in the treatment of
lateral epicondylitis,
although both
treatments relieve
symptoms.”

Confounders
addressed: age and
gender. Data suggest
steroid injection
superior to ESWT.

228

Holdsworth
1993

3.0

N = 36
with lateral
epicondylitis.
Duration 2
weeks to
18
months.

3.5

N= 49
having
symptoms
of lateral
epicondylit
is less
than 3
months
duration

2.5

N = 324
with
medial or
lateral

RCT

Emanet
2010
RCT

Simunovic
1998
RCT

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

50% as a criterion of
success at 3 months
after treatment end,
21 (84%) of Group 1
had pain reduction
≥50% vs. 29 (60%) of
Group 2 (chi-squared
test, p <0.05).
Phonophoresis
Mean subjective
scores of pain at rest
(pre/post): US 5.6/5.1
vs. Phono 14.3/12.2
vs. US plus clasp
5.6/7.8 vs. phono plus
clasp 6.1/5.8. (Graph
and data do not
match. Graph
suggests phono plus
clasp far worse, but
data suggest phono
alone did worse).

Ultrasound
(3MHz,
1.5W/cm2) with
aquasonic 100
v.
phonophoresis
(ultrasound
with
hydrocortisone
1% cream with
dimethicone)
vs. ultrasound
with clasp
(Thӓmert) v.
phonophoresis
with clasp; 12
treatments
maximum 6
weeks.
Low-level Laser Therapy
Patients
No significant
received 15
differences were
sessions of
found between
laser
groups though at 12
(Endolaser
weeks both group
422-230 VAC,
had significant
laser probe
improvement.
one diode
laser, LP 100)
to most
sensitive
points around
lateral
epicondyle
with dose of 1
J/cm² for 2
minutes (5d
per week for 3
weeks) (n=25)
vs. placebo
group which
received same
protocol by
same
physiotherapist
: without
device being
turn. Follow-up
at 0/3/12
weeks.
Patients with
No significant
bilateral
differences between 2
symptoms all
groups when both
underwent
centers combined.

“Our study has
confirmed that
ultrasound treatment
does bring about a
favourable response
in the majority of
patients. We found no
suggestion that the
application of a
hydrocortisone
coupling medium
enhanced this
favourable response.”

Small group sizes.
Unclear if blinded
(“independent”)
assessor. If so, study
is moderate quality by
score. Data suggest
equivalency, but are
likely underpowered
for effects.

“Although low energy
laser therapy had no
advantage compared
to placebo in patients
with LE for the short
term, a significant
improvement,
particularly in
functional
parameters, was
achieved in the long
term. Laser, which
has relatively no side
effects, might be
included among longterm treatment
options for LE.”

Some data suggest
place group worse at
baseline. Sequential
allocations. Less than
3 month duration.
Quasi randomized
trial with 12 weeks
follow-up.

“The current clinical
study provides further
evidence of the
efficacy of LLLT in the

Stated technician was
blinded but unclear
how that could have
been. Not stratified,
229

Tsui 2002

epicondylitis
(case
definitions
not
provided)
durations
unclear
though at
minimum
include
subacute
and
chronic

trigger point
technique
(tender point).
Patients with
unilateral
symptoms
randomly
allocated to 1
of 3 treatment
groups: trigger
points,
scanner, and
combination
therapy.

1.5

N = 20
with pain
over
lateral
epicondyle

Manual
acupuncture
(MA) (n=10) vs.
electroacupuncture
(EA) (n = 10) 3
times a week
for 2 weeks.
Study duration
unclear,
possibly no
follow-up
beyond 2
weeks (not
stated).

3.5

N = 18
(ages 24
to 72) with
lateral epicondylitis
(apparentl
y required
all of
tendernes
s, Cozen’s
Mill’s
middle
finger
extension
tests)
Duration
at least 3
months
(means 14
and 23
months).

Noxious level
electrical
stimulation
(4Hz, DC for
30s to the
most tender
point,
“adjusted to
the subject’s
pain tolerance
level”) vs
placebo
stimulation
(sham). 6
treatments
over 2-3
weeks. No
subsequent
follow-up in
both groups as
sham received
active
treatment after
trial.

RCT

Reza
Nourbakhs
h
2008
RCT

Statistically significant
difference was found
between the groups
with the scanner
technique (p <0.05). In
acute cases, scanner
technique was favored
over TPs (p>0.001).
For acute and chronic
a significant difference
was found favoring
scanner technique
over combination
technique (p < 0.001).

Acupuncture
Pain VAS scores
favored EA vs. MA
(p<0.001) and EA.
Pain free grip better in
both groups vs.
baseline control
(p<0.05).

Electrical Stimulation
Grip strengths
(pre/post): E-stim
(70.4/90.2) vs. sham
(91.5/89.2), p = 0.04.
Pain intensity: E-stim
(4.2/1.1) vs. sham
(3.85/4.0), p = 0.01.
Noxious level e-stim
superior for functional
level (p = 0.013), and
pain-limited activity (p
= 0.003).

management of
lateral and medial
epicondylitis.”

analyses use both
lateral and medial
epicondylitis
combined. Lack of
analyses and smaller
numbers of medial
epicondylitis suggests
non-significant results.
Strong potential for
bias (as seen in
combination vs. each
location analyses).
Many details sparse,
including unclear
methodology,
selection, case
definition, and
administration of
treatments.

“[B]oth MA and EA
group have significant
differences in pain
relief compare with
control group….There
were significant pain
reduction and greater
improvement in
handgrip strength in
the EA group than the
MA group.”

Small sample size.
Some text no
understandable.
Patients not
described. Many
details sparse. Time
and outcomes
unclear.

“[T]reating tender
points over the lateral
epicondyle with lowfrequency
hyperstimulation
could clinically
improve pain, grip
strength, limited
activity due to pain
and functional
activities in subjects
with chronic lateral
epicondylitis.”

Unclear how 2 RCTs
run simultaneously
and whether double
enrolled. Trial claims
double blinding, but
patient blinding not
plausible when
“noxious” level
stimulation used and
adjusted to patient
tolerance level.
Adequacy of sham/
blinding not
measured.
Sham/placebo likely
more equivalent to no
treatment. Small
sample; baseline grip
strengths different
between groups,
apparent
randomization failure
may invalidate results.
Methodological issues
result in a low quality
trial.

TENS

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

230

Weng 2005

2.0

N=20
patients
between
the ages
of 20-30
with tennis
elbow pain
for at least
3 months

5 KHz
VAS (before/after):
“[A]cupuncture-like
modulated by
control
TENS with modulated
2 Hz frequency (4.80±1.93/4.95±2.01
frequency may be a
mode TENS
) vs. LF
good treatment
on
(4.40±2.16/3.70±2.00, choice for patients
acupuncture
p<0.05) vs. HF
with tennis elbow
points LI10
(4.16±2.37/3.42±2.01, pain.”
and LI11 (LF
p<0.05). Percentage
group) vs. 5
change in VAS:
KHz
control (4.16±25.0,
modulated by
p<0.05) vs. LF (100 Hz
18.51±18.1, p<0.05)
frequency
vs. HF (-16.32±16.56,
mode of TENS p<0.05).
on
acupuncture
points LI10
and LI11 (HF
group) vs.
sham TENS
(control group)
15 minutes per
visit, 3 times a
week for 2
weeks.
Glucocorticoid Steroid Injections

3.0

N = 21with
lateral epicondylitis

2.0

N = 48
with lateral
epicondylitis
(pain over
common
extensor
origin with
resisted
wrist
extension
and point
tendernes
s over
epicondyle
)

Naproxen
250mg BID for
2 weeks (initial
500mg dose)
vs.
betamethasone
6mg plus
prilocaine
injection (long
acting form
given as
injection).
Follow-up
unclear, but
possibly 2
weeks.
Ultrasound with
coupling agent
vs. ultrasound
with 10%
hydrocortisone
coupling agent
vs.
transcutaneous
electrical nerve
stimulation vs.
hydrocortisone
and lidocaine
injection.
Details of
treatment not
provided.
Treatments QD
for 5 days
except
injection. All
treated with

Randomize
d
Crossover
Trial

Saartok
1986
RCT

Halle
1986
RCT

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

Grip strength
improved 9% in
naproxen vs. 2%
betamethasone (NS).
Doctor’s evaluations
were50% improved
on naproxen vs. 40%
with injection at 2
weeks (NS).

“The results of this
pilot study indicate
that oral naproxen
(250 mg twice daily
for two weeks) is as
effective as a single
injection of a
corticosteroid into the
site of tenderness in
the treatment of
epicondylitis.”

Pain Intensity Index:
US 16.5 vs. US with
hydrocortisone 13.5
vs. TENS 1.5 vs.
Injection 2.5 (latter 3 p
<0.05). Pain rating
index total: US 7.5 vs.
US with
hydrocortisone 16.0
vs. TENS 7.0 vs.
Injection 3.0 (all but
US with
hydrocortisone p
<0.05). Comparing
pre/post tests: US
69% of variables
improved, 12% same,
and 19% worse. US
with hydrocortisone
65% improved, 12 %
same, 23% worse.

“While no difference
was demonstrated to
exist between the four
treatment protocols, it
was shown that
improvement, as
measured by the pain
indexes, did occur
over all four treatment
groups when the pretreatment and posttreatment values
were compared.”

Patients not
described. Many
details sparse.

Small sample. Groups
well matched for
variables: age, sex,
duration of present
condition, chronicity
and probable
causative factor.
Previous history of
other disorders of
locomotor system
more common in
naproxen group (8 vs.
3). Data suggest no
differences over short
duration, likely
underpowered.
Much of study not
well described. No
Placebo. Short follow
up (5 days). Poor
blinding, though
ultrasound attempted
blinding. No
description of
randomization/confou
nders – no discussion
of individual group
demographics. Onetailed t-tests.
Conclusions of lack of
differences between
groups appear likely
underpowered and
incorrect.

231

Toker
2008

1.5

RCT

N = 21
with lateral
elbow pain
with
confirmed
tennis
elbow
after
physical
exam.

elbow cuff,
avoiding
strenuous
activity, ice
massage BID.
Five days
treatment.
Depomedrol
1mL plus
prilocaine 1mL
plus oral
diclofenac plus
topical
etofenamate
cream (n=11)
v. oral and
topical antiinflammatory
treatment
(n=10).

TENS 56% improved,
23% same, 21%
worse. Injections 63%
improved, 25% same,
12% worse.

Anti-inflammatory
group showed a
significant
improvement in pain
scores from before
and after treatment
(p=0.026). The
injection group
showed a significant
improvement as well
(p=0.003).

“[S]ignificantly
enhanced efficacy of
the combination
treatment used in this
study might be limited
to the short-term and
that adverse effects
of steroids on the
tendons should be
taken into
consideration.”

Sparse details.
Unknown follow-up
duration. No
medication doses
provided.

MEDIAL EPICONDYLALGIA
Author/Yea
r
Study
Type
Simunovic
1998

Scor
e (011)

Population

Comparison
Group

Results

Conclusion

Comments

2.5

N = 324
with medial
or lateral
epicondylitis (case
definitions
not
provided)
durations
unclear
though at
minimum
include
subacute
and chronic

Patients with
bilateral
symptoms all
underwent trigger
point technique
(tender point).
Patients with
unilateral
symptoms
randomly
allocated to one
of 3 treatment
groups: trigger
points, scanner,
and combination
therapy.

“The current clinical
study provides
further evidence of
the efficacy of LLLT
in the management
of lateral and
medial
epicondylitis.”

Stated technician
blinded, but unclear
how possible. Not
stratified, analyses use
both lateral and medial
epicondylitis combined.
Lack of analyses and
smaller numbers of
medial epicondylitis
suggests non-significant
results. Strong potential
for bias (as seen in
combination vs. each
location analyses).
Details sparse, unclear
methodology, selection,
case definition,
treatment
administration.

1.5

N = 18 with
lateral,
medial or
“posterior”
epicondylitis

Diflunisal (initial
dose of diflunisal
1000mg followed
by diflunisal
500mg every 12
hours for a
period of up to 15
days) vs.
Naproxen.

No significant
differences between
groups when both
centers combined.
Statistically
significant
difference between
groups with scanner
technique (p <0.05).
In acute cases,
scanner technique
favored over TPs (p
>0.001). For acute
and chronic a
significant
difference favored
scanner over
combination
technique (p <
0.001).
No statistically
significant
differences any
categories between
study drugs or preand post-test
results at 5th level
single tail
distribution. One
patient receiving
diflunisal developed
transient nausea
and stomach
cramps though
both study agents
generally well
tolerated.

“Diflunisal and
naproxen were
generally effective
in the treatment of
mild to moderate
pain associated
with epicondylitis;
there were no
significant
differences
between the
drugs.”

Methods not well
described. Open-label.
Small study
population. Short
duration (15 days). No
placebo group.

RCT

Adelaar
1987
RCT

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

232

OLECRANON BURSITIS
Author/Yea
r
Study
Type

Scor
e (011)

Sample
Size

Comparison
Group

Results

Weinstein
1984

3.5

N=60
males with
traumatic
olecranon
bursitis
followed
31 months
(range 662).

Bursal
aspiration vs.
aspiration plus
corticosteroid
injection.
Techniques
and doses may
have varied.

Final data obtained
from 49 (82%). Faster
resolution with steroid
injection (graphic
interpretation:
effusions in 4% vs.
28% at 4wks).

Conclusion

Comments

“[L]ocal corticosteroid
is an effective
treatment for
traumatic olecranon
bursitis, the high
incidence of side
effects and selflimiting nature of the
condition indicate
conservative therapy
for most patients.”

Not randomized.
Clinical trial. Many
details sparse. Data
suggest complications
occurred in those
treated with
corticosteroid injection.

Conclusion

Comments

“[A]ll three different
conservative
treatment
strategies were
compared and
showed good
comparable results
in terms of healing,
healing time, pain
and function.”

Randomization by date
of presentation. Data
suggest equal efficacy.

Conclusion

Comments

Aspiration

Controlled
clinical trial

ELBOW FRACTURES
Author/Yea
r
Study
Type

Scor
e (011)

Sample
Size

Comparison
Group

Results

Immobilization
Van
Leemput
2007

3.0

Pseudorandomized
clinical trial

N = 102
allocated
by date of
hospital;
excluded
open
fractures,
<18 years,
obvious
signs of
infection in
fracture,
and
multiple
traumas.

Immobilization in
below-elbow for
3 weeks vs.
above-elbow for
3 weeks vs.
below-elbow for
6 weeks vs
compression
bandage and
immediate
mobilization for 6
weeks; 12 weeks
follow-up.

Bony healing times
above/below 3
weeks 10.7 weeks
(12.5% delayed
union) vs. 6 weeks
10.5 weeks (13.9%
delayed union) vs.
no plaster cast 10.4
weeks (11.8%
delayed union), NS.
No differences in
VAS scores, loss of
rotation arc, loss of
flexion/extension
arc, or bony healing
time.

ULNAR NEUROPATHIES – CUBITAL TUNNEL
Author/Yea
r
Study
Type

Scor
e (011)

Population

Warwick
1995

2.5

N = 57 after
cubital
tunnel
release
surgery
with medial
epicondylec
tomy.

RCT

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

Comparison
Group

Results

Range of Motion Exercises
Physical therapy
Final elbow ROM
“[B]etter results can
group with active for extension for
be obtained by
and passive
those not achieving starting
range of motion
full active extension rehabilitation
(ROM) exercises comparing group 1
immediately
started 14 days
vs. group 2: 51%
following cubital
postoperatively
vs. 4%; p<0.001.
tunnel surgery with
(n=29) vs. same
medial
treatment
epicondylectomy.”
regiment started
3 days
postoperatively.
Glucocorticoid Steroid Injections

Data suggest early
mobilization superior
for ROM and RTW (2.2
vs. 4 months)

233

Hong
1996
RCT

3.5

N = 10 men
with 12
ulnar nerve
lesions at
the elbow.
All showed
signs and
symptoms
of ulnar
neuropathy.
Nerve
conduction
tests used,
but not well
described.

Nocturnal splint
therapy only (n=
5 nerves) vs.
splint plus
triamcinolone
40mg plus
lidocaine 1%
2mL into the
cubital tunnel
and around ulnar
nerve (n= 7
nerves). Followup at 1 and 6
months.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC.

Severity of
symptoms
(pre/1mo/6mo):
splint
(3.4±0.8/1.6±1.2/1.
8±1.1) vs.
combined
(3.3±0.9/1.7±0.8/1.
1±0.8), NS
between
treatments. Both
groups also
improved with
signs, but NS. No
change in sensory
conduction was in
either group at 1 or
6 months (p>0.05).
Both groups did not
differ.

“[S]plinting alone
seems to be
adequate for
treatment of ulnar
neuropathy at the
elbow, since local
steroid injection did
not offer any
additional benefit.”

Small sample sizes.
No mention of
definition of ulnar
neuropathy, especially
condylar groove vs.
cubital tunnel with
NCS, which may be
critical.

234

