Shoulder Disorders
Effective July 14, 2025

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Summary of Recommendations .............................................................................................. 2
Workflows ............................................................................................................................... 2
Introduction ............................................................................................................................ 2
Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies ................................................................................................. 49
Bicipital Tendinopathy and Ruptured Bicipital Tendon ....................................................... 204
Shoulder Osteoarthrosis (Glenohumeral and Acromioclavicular Joint)............................... 226
Osteonecrosis (Avascular Necrosis) .................................................................................... 285
Adhesive Capsulitis ............................................................................................................. 307
Thoracic Outlet Syndrome .................................................................................................. 376
Pectoral Strains and Tears ................................................................................................... 416
Shoulder Dislocation and Instability .................................................................................... 423
Labral Tears, including Superior Labral Anterior Posterior (SLAP) Tears ............................. 468
Acromioclavicular Sprains and Dislocations ........................................................................ 503
Shoulder Fractures .............................................................................................................. 533
Clavicular Fractures ............................................................................................................. 570
Brachial Plexus Injuries ....................................................................................................... 598
Trigger Points and Myofascial Pain ..................................................................................... 631
Contributors and Disclosures .............................................................................................. 679
References .......................................................................................................................... 688

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

1

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The following guideline contain recommendations for evaluating and managing Shoulder
Disorders from the Evidence-Based Shoulder Disorders Panel.
These recommendations are based on critically appraised higher-quality research evidence
or, when such evidence was unavailable or inconsistent, on expert consensus as required in
ACOEM’s Methodology. Recommendations are made under the following categories:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Strongly Recommended, “A” Level
Moderately Recommended, “B” Level
Recommended, “C” Level
Insufficient – Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – No Recommendation (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – Not Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Not Recommended, “C” Level
Moderately Not Recommended, “B” Level
Strongly Not Recommended, “A” Level

WORKFLOWS
●
Master Algorithm. Care of Acute and Subacute Shoulder Disorders
●
Algorithm 1. Initial Evaluation of Shoulder Disorders
●
Algorithm 2. Initial and Follow-up Management of Shoulder Disorders
●
Algorithm 3. Evaluation of Slow to Recover Patients with Shoulder Disorders
(Symptoms >4 Weeks)
●
Algorithm 4. Surgical Considerations for Patients with Anatomic and Physiologic
Evidence of Shoulder Instability, Complete Rotator Cuff Tear, or Impingement Syndrome
Coupled with Persistent Symptoms
●
Algorithm 5. Further Management of Shoulder Disorders
●
Algorithm 6. Management of Osteoarthrosis in the Shoulder
●
Algorithm 7. Management of Osteonecrosis
●
Algorithm 8. Management of Adhesive Capsulitis
●
Algorithm 9. Thoracic Outlet Syndrome

INTRODUCTION
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The following section contains general recommendations for evaluating and managing
Shoulder Disorders from the Evidence-Based Shoulder Disorders Panel. See also the
recommendations for specific conditions, which are listed in their respective sections:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies
Bicipital Tendinopathy
Shoulder Osteoarthrosis
Shoulder Osteonecrosis
Adhesive Capsulitis
Thoracic Outlet Syndrome
Pectoral Strains and Tears
Shoulder Dislocations and Instability

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

2

●
●
●
●
●
●

Labral Tears
Acromioclavicular Sprains and Dislocations
Shoulder Fractures
Clavicular Fractures
Brachial Plexus Injuries
Trigger Points and Myofascial Pain

These recommendations are based on critically appraised higher-quality research evidence
or, when such evidence was unavailable or inconsistent, on expert consensus as required in
ACOEM’s Methodology. Recommendations are made under the following categories:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Strongly Recommended, “A” Level
Moderately Recommended, “B” Level
Recommended, “C” Level
Insufficient – Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – No Recommendation (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – Not Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Not Recommended, “C” Level
Moderately Not Recommended, “B” Level
Strongly Not Recommended, “A” Level

OVERVIEW
This clinical practice guideline presents recommendations on assessing and treating adults
with shoulder disorders. It is critical to note that “shoulder pain” may often be a symptom of
another disorder in another body part, especially of the cervical spine and thorax. Thus,
careful evaluation to determine the diagnosis and origin of the pain is critical in order to be
able to form a well-founded, evidence-based approach to treatment (see also, e.g., the
ACOEM Cervical and Thoracic Spine Disorders Guideline).
This guideline addresses the following shoulder disorders that commonly present to
physicians: acromioclavicular arthrosis and glenohumeral arthrosis; acromioclavicular
sprain, separation or dislocation; adhesive capsulitis; bicipital tendinitis and tears; brachial
plexus injuries; calcific tendinitis; degenerative joint disease (including osteoarthrosis);
dislocation (glenohumeral); fractures; instability; labral tear; non-specific shoulder pain;
osteonecrosis; rotator cuff syndromes; rotator cuff tears; thoracic outlet syndrome; and
trigger points/myofascial pain.
Topics include: the initial assessment and diagnosis of patients with acute, subacute, and
chronic shoulder disorders with particular emphasis on work-related factors; identification
of red flags that may indicate the presence of a serious underlying medical condition;
diagnostic considerations and special studies for identifying clinical pathology; workrelatedness, return-to-work planning (including work restrictions, modified duty, and
activity level); clinical management; occupational and physical therapy indications; surgical
indications; rehabilitation; and the management of delayed recovery.
Algorithms for patient management are included. The guideline’s master algorithm
schematizes a recommended approach by which practitioners may generally manage

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

3

patients with shoulder disorders. The following text, tables, and numbered algorithms
expand upon the master algorithm.
Acromioclavicular (AC) Arthrosis, Glenohumeral Arthrosis
Arthroses in the acromioclavicular and glenohumeral joints are common, although less
common than those of the hands, knees, and hips. Radiographs show degenerative joint
disease and may suggest an underlying etiology. Etiologies for arthroses include
osteoarthrosis (also known as osteoarthritis), developmental anomalies, rheumatoid
arthritis, other inflammatory rheumatological disorders, crystal diseases, post-infectious
complications, and systemic factors. Most cases are assumed to be degenerative
osteoarthroses with a genetic component.
Acromioclavicular (AC) Sprain, Separation, Dislocation
Sprains involve high-force falls and any type of trauma that produce a disruption of the
ligaments about a joint. Commonly, these injuries occur by direct blow, typically from falling
laterally onto the shoulder, or a fall on an outstretched hand, or direct trauma to the joint.
AC joint separation (“shoulder separation”) and dislocation are more severe than a Grade I
AC joint sprain.
Adhesive Capsulitis (Frozen Shoulder)
Adhesive capsulitisa involves a reduction in passive range of motion (ROM) of the shoulder
in three or more directions. To fully assess, the affected shoulder’s ROM should be
compared with the unaffected side. Frozen shoulder can be classified as idiopathic adhesive
capsulitis, or secondary to trauma, or underlying shoulder pathology. The most common
cause is idiopathic and associations with diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, and female
gender have been reported. Glenohumeral contracture can also occur after traumatic injury,
in association with rotator cuff disorders, or after shoulder surgery.
Bicipital Tendinitis and Tears
Anterior shoulder pain may be caused by bicipital tendinitis. Bicipital tears are believed to
result from pathophysiological mechanisms similar to rotator cuff tears. Many are thought
to be a result of chronic tendinopathy followed by tears while others are a result of an acute
traumatic event typically occurring in the context of a prior degenerative tear, which often
has been asymptomatic. They generally occur in conjunction with rotator cuff pathology.
Another sometimes related but infrequent entity is biceps subluxation and dislocation.
Brachial Plexus Injuries
Brachial plexopathies are caused by forceful stretching or compression of the nerves that
travel from the spine to the upper extremity and are thought to occur after relatively severe
or high-force accidents, falls from heights, and sports (e.g., “stingers”). However, reliable
etiological and epidemiological data are not available. Idiopathic brachial plexopathy occurs
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

4

infrequently, and Parsonage Turner Syndrome should be considered in the differential
diagnosis.
Calcific Tendinitis
There is no consensus as to why calcific tendinitis occurs but some hypotheses include
underlying transformation of the tenocytes into chondrocytes inducing subsequent
calcification within the tendon; abnormal activity of the thyroid gland; metabolic diseases
(e.g., diabetes), and genetic predisposition (1). These calcium deposits are generally found
inside or around the rotator cuff tendons, with the supraspinatus tendon being the most
common location for such deposition. These patients may either be asymptomatic or have
course of clinical onset that is similar to adhesive capsulitis in those with chronic non-severe
pain. It can also present as acute severe onset of atraumatic shoulder pain, an unusual
presentation for rotator cuff syndromes. The risk factors, evaluation, diagnosis, and some
treatments tend to be similar to rotator cuff tendinopathies although there are some
specific differences.
Degenerative Joint Disease (including Osteoarthrosis)
Degenerative joint disease is a term which includes any age-related changes in any joint
from any cause. Joints in the body are typically synovial fluid-filled, synovium-lined,
ligamentously encapsulated joints that allow for low friction movement between adjacent
bones. Common causes are osteoarthrosis, inflammatory disorders (e.g., rheumatoid
arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and psoriasis) and crystalline arthropathies (e.g.,
gout, pseudogout, apatites). Osteoarthrosis (OA) is the more precise name for
osteoarthritis, as there is no overt inflammation with redness, swelling, or palpable warmth.
OA, a degenerative disorder in the joint which primarily affects the cartilage on the articular
surface, is marked by thinning of that cartilage, osteophyte formation, and subchondral
sclerosis. Pain on movement and stiffness develop. Post-traumatic OA may develop in a
joint after a significant injury (e.g., fracture), in which case it is often delayed by many years.
If there is asymmetric disease in the shoulders on x-ray and this injury was occupational,
then the subsequent osteoarthrosis is also typically considered, at least in part,
occupational. As inflammatory and crystalline arthropathies are non-occupational, they are
not included in detail in this guideline.
Dislocation (Glenohumeral)
Shoulder dislocation occurs when a supramaximal force is applied to the shoulder
musculature and joint capsule, which definitionally are unable to resist, resulting in
stretching and partial rupture of the joint capsule. Labral tearing also usually accompanies
this injury. As this injury involves disrupting ligaments, it is technically a sprain. Frequently,
the shoulder will require a closed reduction by a medical professional, although sometimes
the patient accomplishes this prior to seeking medical care. Once dislocated, the shoulder
ligaments will become more lax, generating more instability and potentially causing
recurrent dislocations. Older patients with dislocations frequently have associated rotator
cuff tears and fractures.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

5

Fractures
Fractures occur due to high-force trauma including falls, sports, and motor vehicle
accidents. Pathologic fractures are the primary exception as minimal force may be required
for those fractures.
Instability
Shoulder instability is associated with a tendency to sublux or dislocate the shoulder.
Instability is a frequent sequela of dislocation. It can also occur due to developmental
abnormalities. Instability can be classified as traumatic, atraumatic instability, or multidirectional instability.
Labral Tear
The labrum is a wedge-shaped fibrocartilaginous structure at the rim of the glenoid that is a
transitional tissue from the articular cartilage of the glenoid to the capsuloligamentous
tissue/structures of the glenohumeral joint. The two commonly reported types of tears are
along the superior labrum (SLAP) and the anterior inferior portion (Bankart), although the
labrum may tear at any point. The long head of the biceps attaches to the superior labrum,
and therefore biceps pathology may coexist with superior labral tears. The labrum is
intimately involved in mechanisms of shoulder stability. The labrum is susceptible to agerelated degeneration and acute injuries can occur superimposed on these degenerative
processes. A labral tear may be associated with shoulder instability or dislocation.
Non-Specific Shoulder Pain
Some cases of shoulder pain do not clearly fit diagnostic criteria and are considered nonspecific. These cases most commonly resolve prior to identifying a clear diagnosis, but
otherwise a specific diagnosis usually becomes clear with time.
Osteonecrosis
Osteonecrosis (avascular necrosis) is particularly likely to occur in areas of tenuous blood
supply that lack collateral blood flow. The hip joint is most commonly affected, followed by
the humeral head. It can progress to degeneration and ultimately humeral head collapse.
Reported risk factors for osteonecrosis in any region of the body include male sex (2),
diabetes mellitus, glucocorticosteroid treatment or excess (2), sickle cell anemia or trait,
alcohol, organ transplantation (3), and multiple myeloma (2). The most prominent
occupational risk factors are proximal humeral fractures and barotrauma (“the bends”),
which may occur both in underwater diving, as well as working in compressed air
environments (e.g., certain types of tunneling projects through unstable sediments
requiring compressed air to maintain the workspace).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

6

Rotator Cuff Disorders
(Includes rotator cuff tendinopathies, rotator cuff tendinosis/tendinitis, supraspinatus
tendinosis/tendinitis, rotator cuff partial tears, impingement syndrome, bursitis)
In general, rotator cuff-related tendinopathy and related disorders such as rotator cuff
partial tears, impingement syndrome, and bursitis, can be considered the same
degenerative condition (4-22). There has long been evidence of insufficient blood supply in
the typical area(s) of rupture (23-28) and recent evidence points to numerous atherosclerotic
disease risk factors (29-40) strongly suggesting a pathophysiological mechanism of
atherosclerosis and/or small vessel disease of the arterial supply to the tendons.b The other
primary competing theory, first described in the 1920s by Meyer (41-43) and advanced by
Neer (17,44), is biomechanical, particularly with impingement of the acromion that develops
as a consequence of the age-related degenerative processes (45-50). Both theories may play a
role, although the atherosclerotic vascular supply mechanism has the largest statistical
associations and so appears of primary importance (29,51,52). Patients with tendon pathology
often have shoulder pain that radiates to the upper arm and deltoid region, and some even
report more distal radiation without paresthesias. Bursitis tends to have non-radiating
shoulder joint pain, although it too may present with deltoid region pain. Partial-thickness
tears cannot reliably be clinically distinguished from the other rotator cuff entities. Many of
the symptoms and examination maneuvers used to assign a diagnosis of “rotator cuff
syndrome” are not specific to a cause. The supraspinatus tendon is the most commonly
affected tendon in the rotator cuff. Tendon pathology most commonly progresses
posteriorly to the infraspinatus. Tendinopathies are generally considered the most
important of the occupational shoulder disorders based on high prevalence (53,54).
Rotator Cuff Tears
(including supraspinatus, other full-thickness tears and bicipital tears)
Rotator cuff tears appear to occur over years of degenerative rotator cuff tendinopathy,
culminating in a full-thickness rotator cuff tear. Presentations vary from severe symptoms to
asymptomatic, despite presence of a tear (55). It is not clear if, or to what extent, tears are
caused by trauma. Most rotator cuff tears develop at the anterior aspect of the
midsubstance of the supraspinatus tendon and progress in all directions, but especially
posteriorly to eventually involve tears of the infraspinatus and teres minor. Involvement of
the subscapularis is less common, but should be considered. The prevalence of rotator cuff
tears is 6-51% for full-thickness tears in asymptomatic patients over age 50 (6,7,10,13,32,34,4446,54,56-68)
.
Thoracic Outlet Syndrome
Thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) involves compression of the neurological and/or vascular
supply to the upper extremity. A few cases involve discrete compression by the first thoracic
rib or cervical rib. Scalene muscle tightness has been described as a cause. There are other
causes of what could be termed physiologic TOS however, there is controversy regarding
whether there is true compression of structures.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

7

Trigger Points/Myofascial Pain, Muscle Tension Syndrome
Myofascial pain syndrome involves trigger points, which are tender areas that may feel
dense with palpation and can elicit pain locally and distally. Patients with muscle tenderness
are typically diagnosed with “myofascial pain.” Prolonged muscular pain is often linked to
underlying psychosocial issues and affective disorders are common. Physical inactivity is
common and there is a propensity towards dependence on passive modalities and
pharmacologic interventions. Most randomized control trials (RCTs) have not distinguished
between tender points (typically found with fibromyalgia; see the Chronic Pain Guideline)
and trigger points, though they frequently note pain limited to muscles of a body region.
However, trigger points have been distinguished by some practitioners from tender points
in that trigger points can “give rise to characteristic referred pain, referred tenderness,
motor dysfunction, and autonomic phenomena [such as muscle twitching or spasm],” and
tender points do not (69).
a

Nomenclature has long been problematic and the term periarthritis has also been used (70,71).

b

This does not rule out contributing mechanical factor(s).

IMPACT
Shoulder disorders are the fourth most common reason patients seek health care treatment
for musculoskeletal pain (72-79). These disorders are also among the five most common
causes of reported work-related musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) in workers’
compensation claims in the United States (80-83). In 2000, annual health care costs for
shoulder pain in the United States have been estimated at more than $7 billion (84).
Arm/shoulder disorders in 2016-17 cost an average of $24,736 in medical costs and $20,729
in indemnity for a total of $45,465 per worker’s compensation case (85). Musculoskeletal
shoulder disorders account for approximately 3–5% of total lost workdays and 10–18% of
claims and costs in workers’ compensation, ranking them in the top five for financial
severity (80,86,87). Workers’ compensation status is associated with higher costs, worse
prognosis, and worse outcomes than patients without workers’ compensation status or
involving litigation (88-94). In general, shoulder disorders are prone to recur (35,95,96-100) and are
often associated with actual or perceived worse general health status (40,51,101-105).

BASIC PRINCIPLES AND DEFINITIONS
Acute, Subacute, or Chronic Pain: For purposes of identifying interventions at different
stages of diseases, acute pain is defined as pain for up to 1 month; subacute is pain from 1
to 3 months; and chronic is pain lasting more than 3 months duration (see Chronic Pain
Guideline for additional information).
Active Therapy: The term “active therapy” is commonly used to describe treatment that
requires the patient to assume an active role in rehabilitative treatment. Although there is
no one specific treatment defined by this term, it most commonly includes therapeutic
exercises (particularly aerobic), functional activities, and muscle reconditioning
(weightlifting or resistance training) (106). Some studies have included active stretching and
treatment with psychological, social, and/or educational components requiring active
participation from the patient (107).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

8

Active Exercise Therapy: Active exercise therapy typically consists of cardiovascular training
and muscle strengthening, (108,109) although it may also include progressive or occasionally
active stretching, especially in patients with substantially reduced ranges of motion. Active
exercise therapy is used as a primary treatment for chronic pain and after various surgeries.
It is also frequently initiated in the course of treating subacute pain. The goal of active
exercise therapy is to improve and/or restore function (108). The word “active” is used to
differentiate individualized exercise programs designed to address and rehabilitate specific
functional, anatomic, or physiologic deficits from passive treatment modalities or from
forms of “exercise” that require little effort or investment on the part of the patient or
clinician.
Brachial Plexus: The nerves traveling from the C5 to T1 spinal cord levels’ ventral rami to
the upper extremity in aggregate are termed the brachial plexus. This includes subdivisions
of these nerves that are anatomically labeled roots, trunks, divisions, cords, and branches.
The anatomic region of the plexus extends from the tissue adjacent to the spinal cord to the
axilla. Injuries to these structures are frequently termed brachial plexopathy.
Bursae: Bursae are thin, lubricated, fluid-filled sacs located between bone and surrounding
soft tissue, bones and tendons, and/or muscles around joints that reduce friction as
movement occurs.
Bursitis: Bursitis is inflammation of a bursa and may be marked by pain when the proximate
tissue is used or the bursa is compressed.
Delayed Recovery: Delayed recovery is an increase beyond the expected time prior to
returning to work or to usual activities, based on reasonable expectations, disorder severity,
age, and treatments provided.
Functional Capacity Evaluation (FCE): A comprehensive battery of performance-based tests
used to attempt to assess an individual’s ability for work and activities of daily living (110). A
job-specific FCE may be done to attempt to identify an evaluee’s ability to perform specific
job tasks associated with a job while a general FCE may be done to attempt to identify an
evaluee’s ability to perform physical activities associated with any job. Results should be
interpreted with caution, as validity is unproven. The testing should be preferably
conducted by someone well-experienced in dealing with patients who may self-limit due to
pain (e.g., occupational or physical therapist).
Functional Improvement (especially objective evidence): Functional improvement entails
tracking and recording evidence of making progress toward increasing a patient’s functional
state. This is best measured by objective evidence such as returning to work and/or
lessening of work limitations. Additionally, use of validated tools such as QuickDASH is often
helpful and preferred to non-validated tools.
Functional Restoration: Functional restoration (sometimes referred to as “interdisciplinary
rehabilitation with a focus on improving function”) often refers to a blend of various
techniques and programs (both physical and psychosocial), rather than one specific set of
active exercises, processes, or therapies. The basic principle for all of these individually
tailored programs is to help patients cope with pain and return to the functional status
required for their daily needs and work activities (111). The term “Functional Restoration
Program” frequently refers to a full-day multidisciplinary, medically-directed program

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

9

typically lasting from 3 to 6 weeks, employing an interdisciplinary team often consisting of
therapists, psychologists, case managers, and nurses (112).
Pain Behavior: Pain behavior includes verbal and non-verbal actions (e.g., grimacing,
groaning, limping, using pain relieving or support devices/slings, requesting pain
medications, etc.) which communicate the concept of pain.
Passive Modality: Passive modality refers to various types of clinician-given treatments in
which the patient is not an active participant. These treatments include medication,
injection, surgery, allied health therapies (e.g., massage, acupuncture, and manipulation),
and various physical modalities such as hydrotherapy (e.g., whirlpools, hot tubs, spas, etc.),
ultrasound, TENS, other electrical therapies, heat, and cryotherapies.
Rehabilitation: The term “rehabilitation” is used in these Guidelines to mean physical
medicine, therapeutic and rehabilitative evaluations, and procedures. Rehabilitation
services are delivered under the direction of trained licensed individuals such as physicians,
occupational therapists, or physical therapists. Mental health professionals may also be
incorporated in the treatment team, particularly for select chronic pain patients.
Shoulder Impingement: Shoulder impingement is a theoretical construct advanced
especially over the past 40 years, proposing that the supraspinatus tendon is compressed
between the acromion and humeral head, resulting in pain, degenerative tendinopathy, and
tears.
Shoulder Joint: The shoulder (glenohumeral) joint is a shallow synovial ball-and-socket joint
based on the articulation of the head of the humeral head and glenoid fossa of the scapula.
The supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis muscles and their tendons
comprise the rotator cuff and contribute to attachment and movement of the humeral head
in the glenoid fossa.
Tendinitis: Tendinitis is inflammation within the tendon or tendon insertion with the clinical
signs of redness, heat, and swelling, accompanied by pain and decreased range of
movement. While “tendinitis” is a widely used term for many cases of shoulder pain
diagnostically, most patients do not demonstrate cardinal signs of inflammation and more
typically may have serological markers of low-grade inflammation.
Tendinosis: Tendinosis is a chronic degenerative tendon injury, unaccompanied by redness
or heat. It is associated with pain and limited movement (113). Tendinosis may be due to an
interaction of individual and physical factors (especially cardiovascular disease risk factors),
which may include vocational and avocational activities. Previously, there was a theory of
“micro-injuries” that was widely used; that theory has been largely discarded as the
accumulated evidence is increasingly demonstrating atherosclerotic changes in the small
vessels supplying tendons with already poor blood supplies.
Sprain: A sprain is the disruption of a ligament and is caused by high forces that exceed
ligament tolerances. Sprains are typically graded I-III, ranging from modest ligamentous
tears but no laxity (I) to complete disruption of the ligament (III).
Strain: Strain is the disruption of a myotendinous junction or a muscle, usually from a highforce unaccustomed exertion. It may also occur during an accident. This term is occasionally
used to describe non-specific muscle pain in the absence of knowledge of an anatomic
pathophysiological correlate.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

10

●
●
●

Grade I: overstretching or slight tearing.
Grade II: incomplete tearing.
Grade III: complete tear or rupture.

INITIAL ASSESSMENT
Thorough medical and work histories and a focused physical examination (see General
Approach to Initial Assessment and Documentation) are sufficient for the initial assessment
of most workers with potentially work-related shoulder symptoms. The medical history and
physical examination include evaluations for serious underlying conditions, red flags, and
consideration for possible referred shoulder pain due to a disorder in another part of the
body (most commonly from the cervical spine and sometimes viscera). The absence of red
flags largely rules out the need for special studies, referral, or inpatient care during the first
4 to 6 weeks for most patients, during which spontaneous recovery is typically expected.
Shoulder disorders may be classified into one of three somewhat arbitrary categories:
●
Potentially serious conditions: including fractures, glenohumeral dislocation,
infection, or neurological or circulatory conditions, including referred cervical, cardiac, or
intra-abdominal pain. Glenohumeral dislocations are considered potentially serious until it is
confirmed there is not concomitant fracture or nerve damage.
●
Specific shoulder disorders: including full-thickness rotator cuff tears, rotator cuff
tendinopathies/syndromes (impingement syndrome, rotator cuff tendinosis, rotator cuff
tendinopathy, supraspinatus tendinosis, partial-thickness rotator cuff tears, bursitis),
bicipital tendinosis, acromioclavicular (AC) joint sprain or separation, labral tears, thoracic
outlet syndrome (TOS), brachial plexus injury, adhesive capsulitis (frozen shoulder), calcific
tendinitis, and instability.
●
Nonspecific shoulder disorders: suggesting neither internal derangement nor
referred pain including trigger points/myofascial pain (including muscle tension syndrome),
fibromyalgia (see Chronic Pain Guideline), degenerative joint disease (including
osteoarthrosis), and nonspecific pain.

MEDICAL HISTORY
The initial evaluation of patients with shoulder pain should include a thorough medical
history, as the vast majority of data to successfully evaluate and treat these patients is
found in the history. A complete occupational history is necessary to assist the patient with
successful accommodation and rehabilitation, as well as to determine work-relatedness (see
General Approach to Initial Assessment and Documentation Guideline; see Workrelatedness Guideline). Standardized questionnaires assessing functional loss and disability,
often called functional patient-reported outcome measures (fPROMS), are recommended to
routinely measure shoulder function and disability in clinical practice (e.g., Disability of the
Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) questionnaire, Shoulder Pain and Disability Index (SPADI)
questionnaire) (114,115,116,117,118,119,120,121,122,123,124,125,126,127,128,129,130,131,132,133,134,135,136).

MEDICAL HISTORY QUESTIONNAIRE
Asking the patient open-ended questions, such as those listed in the Medical History
Questionnaire, allows the physician to gauge the need for further discussion or specific
inquiries to obtain more detailed information. Start eliciting a history with open-ended
questions, such as: “What may I do for you today?” This approach helps to frame the
discussion towards what the patient feels is the main purpose of the visit. Elicitation of the
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

11

patient’s concerns may initially include seemingly tangential issues, but may prove
important later and helps ensure that the physician is able to address issues important to
quality clinical care and patient experience.
1. SYMPTOM ONSET
●
What are your symptoms?
●
When did your symptoms begin?
●
Where did your symptoms first occur? Were there symptoms primarily in the
shoulder joint, down the arm, hand, and/or up in the neck?
●
What do you think caused the problem? How did it occur? Do you recall a specific
inciting event?
●
How do you think it is related to work? (It is important to obtain all information
necessary to document the circumstances and biomechanical factors of injury to assist the
patient in obtaining compensation, where appropriate.)
●
Was there acute or gradual onset of pain or limitation of motion? For traumatic
injuries: was the area deformed?
●
What is the day pattern to your pain? When is it worst? Do you have a problem
sleeping?
●
How does having this pain affect your life?
2. PROGRESS OF SHOULDER CONDITION
●
Since these symptoms began, have your symptoms changed? How?
●
Have your activities been limited? How long have your activities of daily living been
limited? For how long?
●
What tests or imaging have you had?
●
Have you had specialist consultations?
●
What treatments have you had so far, including over-the-counter and prescription
medication?
3. PRESENT SYMPTOMS
●
What are your symptoms currently? How does the worker act when describing them
(may help to ascertain the expression of and meaning of pain to the worker, while simple
hand gestures and postures taken while describing the pain are often highly useful for
diagnosis)?
●
Are you experiencing pain, weakness, or limited motion (stiffness) in your shoulder?
●
Are you experiencing popping, clicking, or catching in your shoulder?
●
Does your shoulder feel unstable?
●
Are your symptoms currently located primarily in the shoulder joint?
●
Is your shoulder pain associated with pain, numbness, tingling, swelling, or color
change in the hand or arm?
●
Are your symptoms constant or intermittent?
●
What makes the problem worse or better?

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

12

●
Do you have pain or other symptoms elsewhere (e.g., neck, chest, or abdomen)? Do
you have fever, night sweats, or weight loss?
4. PRESENT SHOULDER CAPABILITIES
●
Can you move your arm over your head?
●
Can you tuck in your shirt, reach your back pocket, or put on a jacket?
●
Can you do overhead activities or work? For how long?
●
Can you wash your hair?
●
How much weight can you lift? What could you lift before?
●
Can you move your shoulder without pain?
●
Can you sleep on the affected shoulder?
●
Does wearing a bra, suspenders, or tool belt harness make your shoulder pain worse
or cause pain?
●
How heavy is your purse/shoulder bag? Have you changed purses/bag (lightened) or
changed how you carry it (to the other shoulder or rolling bag)?
●
Do you have weakness in your hand, arm, or shoulder?
●
Have you noticed any loss of muscle mass?
5. PATIENT GOALS
●
●
●
●

What are your goals in relation to this shoulder problem?
What are you currently unable to do that you want to be able to get back to?
What are your goals for work? Non-work activities? Hobbies? Sports?
What could we measure as goals to track your progress?

6. PREVIOUS SHOULDER PROBLEMS
●
Have you had similar episodes previously?
●
Have you had previous testing or treatment? What treatment (medication, surgery,
therapy, etc.)? What were the results? With whom?
●
How was your recovery?
●
Did this previous shoulder problem resolve completely?
●
How long did it take to get back to light duty work? To full duty work?
●
If didn’t return back to original occupation: were you determined to have a
disability?
7. JOB REQUIREMENTS
●
What are your specific job duties? Do you rotate jobs?
●
What does your work require you to do with your shoulder?
●
What postures and activities are required at work? How much do you lift at work as
a maximum lift? How heavy is a usual lift? Do you work with your hands at or above chest
height?
●
Do you have assistance of other people or lifting devices?
●
How often are shoulder activities required?

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

13

8. OFF-THE-JOB ACTIVITIES (AVOCATIONAL ACTIVITIES)
●
What other activities (hobbies, workouts, sports) do you engage in at home or
elsewhere (outside of work)?
●
Do you use your shoulder to perform these activities?
●
Do you do any overhead arm actions? How? How often?
●
Can you perform activities of daily living (e.g., dressing, bathing, grooming, etc.) or
instrumental activities of daily living (e.g., shopping, food preparation, housekeeping, etc.)?
9. DO YOU HAVE OTHER MEDICAL PROBLEMS?
●
Osteoarthrosis, rheumatoid arthritis or other arthritides or auto-immune disorders
(e.g., lupus, psoriasis)?
●
Fractures, upper extremity surgeries?
●
Cardiovascular disease? Heart disease risk factors?
●
Pulmonary disease? Do you smoke? Did you smoke? How much?
●
Gastrointestinal problems or liver disorder?
●
Diabetes mellitus? Thyroid disorder?
●
Do you have neck pain or history of neck trauma?
●
Neurological disorders (including neuropathies, radiculopathies, headaches)?
●
Psychophysiological disorders (e.g., irritable bowel syndrome, chronic fatigue
syndrome, sick building syndrome, fibromyalgia, or multiple chemical sensitivities)?
●
Do you have symptoms of infection? Fever, chills, symptoms of infection elsewhere?
●
Have you ever had cancer?
●
What medications do you take? Over-the-counter medications? Prescription
medications?
10. Is there any psychological, psychiatric, mental health, substance use, or alcohol history?
●
Have you ever had a substance use problem? Driving while under the influence of
alcohol? Detoxification?
●
Have you ever had an alcohol problem? (CAGE or MAST screening especially required
for possible osteonecrosis)
●
Is there use of other drugs? (Current and prior use)
11. What is the occupational psychosocial context?
●
●
you?

Do you like your job?
What is your relationship with your co-workers and supervisor and how do they treat

12. Assess whether there are problems at home/social life. Does the patient feel in control
of most situations? Is there support?
●

How do your family members get along with each other?

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

14

●
How do they help and support you, including assistance with chores?
●
Does your family treat you differently now that you are in pain? Have your roles at
home changed because of your injury?
●
How do your friends treat you differently?
●
Do you get increased symptoms when you are dealing with problems with your
family and friends? How often? When? Why?
13. As billing is different, and rules regarding treatment often differ, it is important to know
if there is worker’s compensation, or other compensation? Are there advocagenica (litigious)
influences?
●

Do you have a lawsuit or other legal action involving this pain problem?

a

The term advocagenic is analogous to iatrogenic, however, it is related to influences involving the litigation
processes with examples including: compensation dependent on symptom severity and duration, advice to
limit functional activity, work-limitation advice that conflicts with medical opinion, advice contrary to medical
plan, and symptom recurrence/exacerbation after contact with an attorney (137).

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
The objective of the physical examination of the shoulder is to define physical abnormalities,
narrow the diagnostic considerations, and focus the treatment plan (138-158). Physical
examination data, including vital signs, should be reviewed for potential inferences
regarding infectious or neoplastic origins.
The physical examination should begin the moment the physician sees the patient.
Observing how the patient holds the shoulder (particularly during a history), uses the
shoulder, sits, walks, and moves is of major importance, often more important than any
other aspect of the exam. It also helps to have the patient demonstrate what positions seem
to provoke or cause the symptoms, as the demonstration is invariably of greater help than
verbal descriptions.
Guided by the medical history, the physical examination includes:
●
General observation of the patient;
●
General level of fitness and physical condition;
●
Upper quadrant screen for neck involvement, and other upper extremity disorders,
including elbow;
●
Neurovascular screening;
●
Testing for various specific shoulder disorders as appropriate to the history; and
●
Monitoring for pain behavior during range of motion, changing postures as a clue to
origin of the problem.

REGIONAL SHOULDER EXAMINATION

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

15

The entire shoulder girdle should be visible and viewed from all angles. Asking the patient to
point to the area of discomfort may be helpful for discrete entities such as AC joint or long
head biceps pathology. Pointing helps determine if the discomfort is at the shoulder joint or
if the patient is referring to the “shoulder” in general (e.g., the upper trapezius). Many
shoulder disorders present with pain that is too diffuse to point to with one finger.
Observe asymmetry or deformity at rest and during movement. Atrophy of the deltoid or
scapular muscles is an objective finding, only arising after weeks to months of symptoms;
atrophy of the supraspinatus muscle is the most clinically relevant. Deformities due to
acromioclavicular separation are visible (e.g., scapular winging at rest, shoulder girdle
ptosis), as are many signs of infection (e.g., elevated temperature, redness, heat,
fluctuance) or gross tumor (e.g., visible vessels, palpable mass). Palpate neck, shoulder and
arm structures, noting patient’s underlying tenderness.
Shoulder range of motion (ROM) should be determined actively and passively. Active ROM
should be performed first to determine how far the patient can move prior to applying
pressure to assess passive ROM. Essential active motions to assess are shoulder elevation in
flexion and abduction, external rotation, and internal rotation with the arm at the side and
at 90° of abduction (105). Passive ROM should be performed for the same motions. Passive
motion is best assessed with the patient supine. The examiner may also determine passive
ROM by eliminating gravity with overpressure, having the patient in the pendulum position,
or by having the patient use the other arm to aid elevation. While checking ROM, watch for
scapular mobility and stability. Movement of the scapula should be observed for winging or
dysrhythmia during active elevation in flexion and/or abduction (159,160). Both can be
enhanced by fatiguing the shoulder with repeated active range of elevation and lowering
the arm. Strength should be assessed, resisting isometric contractions of the same essential
motions for ROM described above, including supraspinatus and infraspinatus assessment.
The choice of which specific tests to use (see Table 1) may be guided by the synthesis of the
information obtained from the history and physical examination. However, many
examination maneuvers have not been validated in quality clinical trials, and do not have
well established sensitivities and specificities. Many exam maneuvers are also reportedly
non-specific and of questionable value (35,79,161-168). It is important to correlate data from
history (e.g., demographics, type and location of symptoms, mechanism of injury) with
findings on physical examination. For example, findings of instability maneuvers are
irrelevant if instability is not the problem. If certain shoulder problems (e.g., pain) are
sufficiently severe, other diagnostic tests may not be helpful; for example, in the presence
of substantial joint stiffness and capsulitis, impingement maneuvers are invalid.
The following table includes common tests and citations for accuracy when available.
Table 1. Common Physical Examination Maneuvers
Shoulder Area Maneuver
Examining
Apprehension (169,170)

GH joint
instability

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

Positive criteria

Anterior directed force is Subjective feeling of
applied to proximal
anterior instability and
humerus in shoulder
fear of anterior

Issues and Interpretation

Subjective test
interpretation although
thought to be accurate.

16

abduction and external
rotation.

glenohumeral
(re)dislocation.

Posterior
Drawer/Relocation (171)

GH joint
instability

Patient is supine with
shoulder abducted and
externally rotated
(anterior apprehension
position). Force on
anterior humerus is
directed posteriorly.

Pain or apprehension. Relatively uncommon type
May appreciate posterior of instability. Operant
laxity in thin patients. It characteristics of the test
eliminates the positive are unclear.
findings on anterior
apprehension maneuver.

Anterior Release Test (172)

GH joint
instability

Posterior directed force
is released from the
humerus with shoulder
in abduction and
external rotation.

Subjective feeling of
anterior instability and
fear of anterior
glenohumeral
(re)dislocation when
pressure is released.

Anterior Slide Test (144)

GH joint
instability

Applying an anteriorly Pain or painful click on Positive test associated
and superiorly directed the anterior or posterior with labral tears.
force on glenohumeral joint line.
joint while patient rests
hand on ipsilateral hip,
thumb posterior.

Sulcus (173)

GH joint
instability

Apply an inferior traction Visible or palpable
Positive confirms possible
to the humerus at the
inferior translation of the glenohumeral joint
elbow (pull humerus
humeral head.
instability. Suggests
downward).
multidirectional instability
in some patients. Objective
finding not dependent
upon patient response.

Relocation Test (174)

GH joint
instability

Shoulder is placed in
Subjective feeling of
Test for instability. May be
abduction and external instability or fear of re- positive with reduction of
rotation then posterior dislocation reduced or sensation of anterior
directed force applied to abolished when anterior instability when pressure is
humeral head.
pressure applied.
applied.

Jobe Relocation (174,175)

May be positive with an
increase in sensation of
anterior instability when
pressure is released.

Wright’s Test (176,177)

Thoracic outlet Shoulder gradually hyper Symptoms are
Definition of a positive test
syndrome
abducted, externally
reproduced and/or radial varies between studies and
rotated. Assess effect on pulse ablated. Should
reports. Test used to infer
radial pulse.
compare with
thoracic outlet syndrome.
asymptomatic shoulder. Many asymptomatics have
pulse diminution or
ablation.

Adson (176,177)

Thoracic outlet Shoulder abducted about Reproduction of
Some variability in
syndrome
90° and externally
symptoms and radial
description of this
rotated. Patient extends pulse diminution or
maneuver (e.g., whether to
and rotates cervical
ablation. Should
extend neck). Test used for
spine towards affected compare with
thoracic outlet syndrome.
hand. Patient then takes asymptomatic shoulder. High rate of pulse ablation
a deep breath and holds
in normal population.
their breath.

Roos (elevated arm stress
test) (176,177,178)

Thoracic outlet Patient assumes position Reproduction of
syndrome
of 90° shoulder
symptoms or sense of
abduction and external heaviness or fatigue.
rotation with 90° elbow
flexion. Patient opens

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

Operant characteristics
unclear. Should be carefully
compared with
contralateral extremity.

17

and closes fists for
several minutes.
Active Compression/
O’Brien (179)

Labrum, AC
joint

Patient stands, shoulder Pain elicited during first Test used for both AC joint
forward flexed 90° with maneuver, reduced or and SLAP lesions.
elbow extended, then
eliminated with second. Frequently positive with
arm adducted 10° to 15° Pain at acromioclavicular rotator cuff syndromes and
medial to body’s sagittal joint or “on top,”
tears
plane and internally
diagnostic of AC joint
rotated so thumb
abnormality. Pain or
pointed downward.
painful clicking described
Examiner stands behind as “inside” shoulder
patient, applies uniform considered positive for
downward force to arm. labral disorder.
With arm in same
position, palm then fully
supinated and maneuver
repeated.

Clunk Sign (173)

Labrum

Rotation of loaded
Painful clunk
shoulder from extension
to forward flexion.

Cross-arm (165,180)

AC joint

Forward flexion to 90º
and active adduction
usually adducted
passively.

Pain in acromioclavicular Positive thought to suggest
joint
degenerative arthrosis in
AC joint. May be positive
with rotator cuff tendinosis
and glenohumeral
arthrosis.

Painful Arc (165,180,181,182,183) Non-specific Patient is asked to raise
shoulder pain, their arm into full
rotator cuff
shoulder abduction.
syndrome

Pain in shoulder joint
While a functional test, it is
with active elevation and typically painful with any
lowering of arm in mid- shoulder condition. Likely
range of elevation (60- not helpful to diagnose a
120)
specific shoulder pathology
as an individual test.

Internal Rotation
Resistance Strength Test
(184)

Non-specific Resist external rotation Pain and/or weakness.
shoulder pain then internal rotation
with arm at 90º external
rotation and 85º internal
rotations.

Drop-arm (165,180,183,185,186)

Supraspinatus Arm raised and held in
tendon
90° of abduction then
released.

Hawkins

Supraspinatus Arm internally rotated Pain in shoulder joint
tendon
while shoulder flexed to and/or reduced ROM.
90º with elbow flexed
90º.

(165,173,180,181,182,183,187,188)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

Felt to suggest labral
disorder; non-specific. May
be positive with rotator
cuff related disorder or
glenohumeral arthrosis,
and AC joint arthrosis.

Differentiation of
impingement/rotator cuff
tendinopathy from other
joint pathology. Not widely
investigated; limited data.

Inability to hold the arm Positive helpful to confirm
in place or inability to
rotator cuff full-thickness
subsequently lower the tear. Most likely to be
arm smoothly.
positive in context of a
massive tear and weak
deltoid. (See below).
May be positive with
arthrosis. As an individual
test, it is helpful to screen
(rule out) but not confirm
presence of rotator cuff
tendinopathy.

18

Supraspinatus/ Jobe Empty Supraspinatus Resisted arm elevation Reproduction of pain in Positive for painful
Can Test
tendon
with shoulder in 90°
shoulder joint or
supraspinatus pathology.
(22,143,165,182,186,189,190,191,192)
scapular place elevation weakness due to pain in
and internal rotation.
the shoulder compared
with the unaffected side.

Rent test (183,193,194,195)

Supraspinatus Transdeltoid palpation Rent in rotator cuff
tendon
with feeling of a rent,
consistent.
sulcus or depression
where the supraspinatus
tear is present.

Positive rent consistent
with large supraspinatus
tear. Utility likely reduced
with obesity.

Subscapularis Patient places hand over Inability to maintain
tendon
posterior lumbar region, position or pain or
hand passively lifted
weakness.
(22,186,192,196,198,199,200)
Lift-off
away from back. Patient
to maintain position.
Attempted lifting of arm
off back at level of the
waist.

Rotator cuff tears, thought
to be specific for
subscapularis. Confounded
by limitation of passive
shoulder internal rotation.

Internal Rotation Lag Sign
(186,196,197)

Belly Press (201)

Subscapularis Performed particularly
strength
on patients who cannot
fully internally rotate.
Patient pushes against
their belly with
approximately 45°
shoulder abduction,
internally rotated with
90° elbow flexion.
Sometimes performed
with examiner pushing
posteriorly on elbow.

External Rotation
Resistance Test

Infraspinatus
and teres
minor

(165,182,185,190)

Arm drops posteriorly or Inferred weakness of
unable to elbow
subscapularis. Operant
maintain in plane of
characteristics unclear.
body.

Resist isometric
Pain or weakness
contraction of shoulder
external rotation

Marked weakness has
ability to confirm and
screen for full-thickness RC
tears while milder
weakness indicates rotator
cuff tendinopathy. Limited
ability to screen for and
confirm rotator cuff
tendinopathy.

External Rotation Lag Sign Infraspinatus
(186,197,202,203)
and teres
minor

Shoulder maximally
Positive test is inability Rotator cuff full-thickness
externally rotated when to maintain the position. tears, particularly involving
examiner behind patient,
infraspinatus or teres
elbow flexed 90º and
minor. Stiffness (e.g.,
shoulder forward flexed
adhesive capsulitis) may
20º. Examiner releases
confound exam.
arm.

Posterior Impingement Sign Infraspinatus
(204,205)
tendon or

Arm is brought into a
position similar to that
noted during the late

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

Presence of deep
Used to detect presence of
posterior shoulder pain articular-sided rotator cuff
tears and posterior labrum

19

supraspinatus cocking phase of
tendon
throwing – abduction to
90° to 110°, extension to
10° to 15°, and maximal
external rotation.
Neer
(44,165,173,181,182,183,187,188,206)

Speed
(143,144,173,180,188,199,206,207,208)

Yergason’s

lesions in patients with
posterior shoulder pain.

Impingement Arm raised in forward
Pain in the shoulder
May be positive with
flexion by examiner who joint. Thought consistent arthrosis. As an individual
holds down the spine of with impingement
test, it contributes to ruling
the scapula
syndrome.
out, but not confirm or
eliminate presence of
rotator cuff tendinopathy.
Biceps tendon Resisted shoulder
elevation with the
shoulder in 90º of
forward elevation and
forearm in supination.

Pain in the bicipital
tendon area.

Positive pain infers bicipital
tendinosis or biceps tendon
instability. Biceps
tendinosis and elbow
disorders may confound
test. Can be positive with a
labral tear and rotator cuff
tendinopathy.

Biceps tendon Resisted elbow flexion Pain in the bicipital
and forearm supination. tendon area signifying
biceps or rotator cuff
origin of pain.

Positive infers bicipital
tendinosis or instability.
Helpful to confirm rotator
cuff tendonitis – not
shoulder instability. Biceps
tendinoses and elbow
disorders may confound
test.

Spurling’s (209)

Neurological: Neck extension with
Reproduction of
neck
head rotated towards
radicular pain into the
affected extremity. As extremity.
traditionally taught, axial
load is applied by the
examiner. *

Helpful to confirm, but not
helpful to screen (rule out)
cervical radiculopathy.

Hoffmann-Tinel’s (or
“Tinel’s”)

Peripheral
neuropathy

(143,144,173,183,188,206,208)

Tapping approximately Distal dysesthesias in the Thought to denote
3-4 times over a
distribution of the nerve peripheral neuropathy.
peripheral nerve or
being tapped.
Increasing concern it has
brachial plexus, generally
too many false positives to
with a reflex hammer.
be useful; and may be a
Most classically
normal finding.
performed over discrete
location such as carpal
tunnel, but can be
performed over any
nerve or location.

Adapted particularly from (79,210). Some caution is warranted as there are considerable methodological
weaknesses of studies evaluating utility of clinical examination maneuvers, including poor descriptions of tests
performed, lack of blinding, small sample sizes, and evaluation in select populations (35,79,161-167,197,211,212).
* Caution is warranted as some patients have neck pain after this maneuver. Some examiners omit active
compression of the head-neck.

NEUROLOGIC AND VASCULAR SCREENING
C5 or C6 radiculopathy may present as shoulder pain or dysfunction. Soft tissue disorders of
the neck can also present as shoulder pain. Examine the neck and cervical nerve root

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

20

function with palpation, reflexes, strength (motor), and sensitivity to touch (sensory),
guided by history and previous exam findings. Assess the vascular status of the shoulder,
proximal upper extremity, and neck by checking peripheral pulses in neutral and stress
positions, and edema and/or color changes. Thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) has varying
signs and symptoms depending on whether it is primarily arteriol, venous, or neurogenic.
Symptoms may include scalene tenderness and positive maneuvers that provoke
neurovascular signs and symptoms; for example, Hofmann-Tinel’s sign may be positive over
the brachial plexus. Once all other diagnoses have been ruled out and TOS is suspected,
non-operative measures should generally be attempted; referral to a surgeon is
recommended for those individuals with confirmed vascular TOS or those with neurogenic
TOS who have failed to improve with 3-6 months of conservative management.

ASSESSING RED FLAGS
Physical examination evidence of septic arthritis, neurologic compromise, cardiac disease, or
intra-abdominal pathology that correlates with the medical history and test results may
indicate a need for immediate consultation depending on the physician’s skills and abilities.
Consultation may further reinforce or reduce suspicions of tumor, infection, fracture, or
dislocation. A medical history that suggests pathology originating in a part of the body other
than the shoulder might warrant examining the cardiovascular and respiratory systems,
abdomen, or other areas. Painless full ROM of the shoulder suggests referred pain.

Table 2. Red Flags for Potentially Serious Shoulder Conditions
Disorder

Medical History

Physical Examination

Fractures

History of significant trauma (e.g., direct,
deceleration, slip, trip, fall, motor vehicles)

Generally severe pain

Severe pain and inability to move the shoulder

Inability to move or use the arm and
shoulder
Significant bruising or hemarthrosis
Deformity consistent with displaced
fracture (with fracture, check for
pulmonary injury and rib fracture as well)
Significant swelling

Dislocation
(glenohumeral joint)

History of significant trauma
History of prior dislocation
Presence of deformity, some with history of
spontaneous reduction or self-reduction

Deformity consistent with unreduced
dislocation Anterior more common than
posterior
Inability or reduced ability to move the
shoulder

Severe pain and inability to move the shoulder

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

21

Infection

History of systemic symptoms of infection (e.g.,
fevers, chills)

Limited range of motion due to severe
pain

Persistent, severe shoulder pain

Systemic signs of sepsis (e.g., elevated
temperature, chills, hypotension,
tachycardia)

May have other, distant sites with symptoms of
infection
Diabetes mellitus
History of immunosuppression (e.g., transplant,
chemotherapy, HIV)

If AC joint, will usually have effusion,
tenderness and may have overlying
erythema
If subacromial, may have erythema and
swelling
If glenohumeral joint, often no findings
other than limited shoulder range of
motion and pain

Tumor

Pain at rest

Palpable mass

History of smoking or other risk factor

Tumor vessels

History of any cancer present or prior (especially lung) Distant findings of cancer
History of immunosuppression (e.g., transplant,
chemotherapy, HIV)
Progressive or acute
Progressive or acute decreased sensation and
neurologic compromise weakness
History of neurologic disease
History of diabetes mellitus
Degenerative disk disease or disk herniation with
cervical root impingement(s) or spinal stenosis

Compression neuropathy (see Neurologic
compromise)
Decreased upper-extremity sensation,
strength, and/or reflexes with peripheral
neuropathy. Possibly pain.
Myotomal and dermatomal deficits and
reduced reflexes if nerve root(s)
involvement

History of trauma
Progressive vascular
compromise

Generally unrelenting painful and cold extremity

Decreased pulses in the upper extremities

History of vascular disease

Cold, pulseless extremity

History of diabetes mellitus

Pain-free full shoulder range of motion

History of atherosclerosis (or usually multiple
cardiovascular disease risk factors)

Differential blood pressure in upper
extremities

History of syphilis

Bruit (e.g., with thoracic aortic aneurysm)

History of dislocation, fracture, etc.
History of high-impact collision
Cardiac condition

History of angina or coronary disease

S3 or S4 heart sounds

History of cardiac risk factors (e.g., smoking, high
cholesterol, high blood pressure, obesity)

Dysrhythmia

Family history of heart disease, especially under age
55 in affected relatives

Cold, clammy skin
Mood appears apprehensive
Hypotension
Pain-free full shoulder range of motion

Subdiaphragmatic
conditions

History of subdiaphragmatic condition (e.g.,
gallbladder, pancreatic or liver disorder, perihepatic,
pelvic inflammatory disease, or cervicitis)
Perforated viscus

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

Tender right upper quadrant
Palpable mass in right upper quadrant
Evidence of pelvic infection

22

Evidence of perforated viscus, free
abdominal air

DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
The cause of the patient’s shoulder symptoms should be determined as accurately as
clinically possible at the time the patient presents. Some imaging may be appropriate
acutely – e.g., x-ray in trauma cases and other conditions outlined in the Special Studies
section below. Consensus recommendations for imaging can be found on the American
College of Radiology Appropriateness Criteria website. If red flags are present, enact or
arrange definitive care or treatment. If no red flags for serious conditions are present, then
develop a plan of care. As many patients will have significant and sufficient improvement in
the first weeks, only some will need additional examination and imaging to confirm or refine
the diagnosis, prognosis, surgery or further treatment, or MRI showing a labral or rotator
cuff tear. The criteria presented in Table 3 follow the clinical thought process for non-red
flag conditions, from the mechanism of illness or injury to unique symptoms and signs of a
particular disorder, to test results, if any tests are needed to guide treatment at this stage. It
is helpful to know and apply the sensitivity, specificity, and likelihood ratios of examination
maneuvers and diagnostic studies to compare the value of various diagnostic approaches.
For example, see Table 3 for unique signs for impingement and rotator cuff disorders.
Table 3. Diagnostic Criteria for Non-red Flag Shoulder Disorders
Probable Diagnosis or Mechanism
Injury

Unique Symptoms Unique Signs

Tests and Results

Nonspecific shoulder
pain

No unique
symptoms. Pain in
shoulder
musculature.

None indicated for
most acute
presentations.

No known specific mechanism.

Impingement/Rotator Generally gradual onset of
No unique
Cuff Tendinopathy;
shoulder pain. May have more
symptoms.
rotator cuff tendinosis, acute presentation. Pain becomes
Non-radiating pain
including partial
symptomatic or increases with
in shoulder and/or
thickness tears
overhead use.
deltoid area.
Night pain in
shoulder joint.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

None

All with persistent
symptoms should
have plain
radiographs to rule
out occult tumor.
Sensitivity and
Initial imaging
specificity for the
should be plain
Neer test is about
radiographs to
79% and 53%,
evaluate for
respectively, and for glenohumeral
the Hawkins-Kennedy arthritis,
test, about 79% and degenerative
59%, respectively (161). changes associated
The Jobe or empty
with rotator cuff
can test may offer
pathology, calcific
better sensitivity (80 tendinitis,
to 96%), but still has degenerative
low specificity (53acromial changes
71%) (213).
(type II or III). MRI
with chronic rotator
Negative Neer and
cuff degenerative
Hawkins impingement
changes.
sign are more helpful
to rule out than to

23

rule in an
impingement
syndrome.

Many patients with
rotator cuff
disorders can have
normal or nonMany non-specific
specific MRI
signs, such as Neer’s
findings.
and Hawkins’
Additionally, there
impingement signs
is a high prevalence
and painful arc may
of tears in
be positive.
asymptomatic
persons.
Calcific tendinitis

Degeneration.

Chronic non-severe When calcium deposit Plain radiographs
pain: no unique
is in supraspinatus,
able to identify
Chronic pain: some present with
symptom. Onset
patients often have calcium deposit(s)
acute onset of severe atraumatic
similar to rotator
pain with abduction in tendon.
pain.
cuff syndromes.
and limitation of
Chronic pain:
motion, but not with
Location of pain and physical
Acute severe pain:
multiple calcium
scapular plain
exam findings relate to the
severe onset of
deposits in
elevation (atypical
location of the calcific lesion.
atraumatic shoulder
tendon(s).
presentation for
Most commonly in supraspinatus
pain.
rotator cuff
tendon but can also present in
Acute severe pain:
syndrome).
subscapularis, infraspinatus and
often large wellSubscapularis calcium defined deposits
teres minor, much less commonly
deposit more likely to although some
in biceps long head.
have pain anteriorly. have more diffuse
calcification that
probably
represents rupture
of the lesion.
Occasionally,
patients with
rotator cuff
syndromes have
small incidental
calcifications in the
mid-substance or
near the cuff
insertion.

Subacromial Bursitis

No different than impingement No unique
No unique sign.
and rotator cuff syndromes.
symptoms. Night
Tenderness over
Possibly due to forceful or
pain thought to be subacromial bursa.
unaccustomed use. Commonly
more common with See above regarding
occurs in conjunction with
this disorder.
rotator cuff
degenerative rotator cuff
tendinopathy.
tendinopathies. May be related to
rheumatoid arthritis or other
systemic rheumatological
disorders.

Same as other
rotator cuff
syndromes. None
usually indicated.

Rotator cuff tear, acute Degenerative condition with
Symptom
To support diagnosis, MRI positive for
and chronic
superimposed forceful use. May presentation is
weakness of shoulder acute tears in
occur without any inciting event. dependent on many in “thumbs down”
younger workers.
factors including
abduction (e.g.,
Inciting events include heavy
Arthrography
speed of tear
empty can test), weak
lifting, sudden pull, fall on
positive for full
(acuity) and size
external rotation, lag
outstretched arm.
thickness tears, if
along with
sign, and lift-off test
MRI or CT
compensatory
may be helpful, but
arthrography are
mechanisms. Acute specificity is
unavailable.
moderate to large questionable. May
tears: marked
have normal or near

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

24

decreased ability to normal strength.
MRI may show
abduct arm and
Positive drop-arm test partial-thickness
moderately painful, is most specific
tears.
non-radiating
examination finding
Ultrasound exam.
shoulder pain.
for large tears.
Symptoms may be
less pronounced or
absent.

Labral tear

Direct trauma laterally to
shoulder.

Mechanical
Anterior slide test is MRI, MR
symptoms, painful reportedly 78. 4%
arthrography. Often
catching sensation. sensitive and 91. 5% accompanied by
Fall on outstretched hand.
specific (214).
other shoulder
Usually also have
pathology.
Dislocation.
nonspecific, nonSensitivity of O’Brien’s
radiating shoulder test 90%, Mayo shear
Throwing motions.
joint pain.
(Dynamic Labral Shear
May occur without specific injury.
test) 80%, and Jobe’s
Pain with
relocation test 76%
movement.
when compared with
arthroscopy (144,175).
Labral tear
presentation can
depend on kind of
tear: SLAP tear, tear
of other parts of
labrum without
instability, labral
tear with instability.

Shoulder instability

Trauma
Acquired non-traumatic
congenital anatomic problem or
laxity

Slipping

Positive apprehension Plain radiographs to
test, relocation and demonstrate
Popping
anterior release test glenoid rim fracture
Feeling of instability for anterior stability. or Hill-Sachs lesion.
“Dead arm”
syndrome

CT arthrogram
evaluates bone
Positive sulcus test
lesions and labral
with multidirectional
pathology.
instability (MDI)
MRI/MR
arthrogram.

Recurrent dislocation
(nonacute)

Previous dislocation from any
cause. May recur due to a fall or
direct impact or without
significant event.

Recurrent
dislocation.

AC joint sprain

Fall on top of shoulder.

Pain over AC joint.

AC joint separation

Fall on top of shoulder.

Severe pain over AC Deformity over AC
Plain radiographs
joint.
joint (i.e., high-riding with separation
distal clavicle)
(>5mm).

Object falling from above onto
shoulder.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

Positive apprehension Radiographic films
test, relocation, and (including lateral
anterior release test axillary) positive for
Fear of dislocation
with anterior
dislocation if
when shoulder is
instability
humerus has not
abducted in external
spontaneously
rotation.
reduced.
Tender over AC joint. Consider
May have swelling of radiographic films
joint, but not
to rule out fracture.
deformity as with AC
separation.

25

Osteonecrosis

Multifactorial. Occupational
factors include
compression/decompression
(dysbarism). Non-occupational
factors include glucocorticoids,
alcohol, diabetes, and smoking.

Progressive, nonradiating pain in
head of humerus.
Pain tends to be at
rest as well as with
use.

Adhesive capsulitis

Idiopathic

Limited range of
Limited passive range Plain radiographs to
motion. Pain end
of motion in 3 or
rule out
range of all motions. more directions, as
glenohumeral
May have night pain well as active ranges arthritis, calcific
in shoulder joint.
of motion.
tendinitis. MRI if
indication of red
flag (infection,
tumor) or if initial
non-operative
treatment fails.

Failed treatment or inactivity
Diabetes mellitus
Hypothyroidism

May have pain with Plain radiographs.
use of movement, but MRI usually used
exam may also be
and shows
relatively normal. If diagnostic findings.
bony collapse, marked
pain with movement.

SPECIAL STUDIES
For most patients with non-traumatic shoulder problems (absent red flags), special studies
are not needed, unless a 4- to 6-week period of non-operative care and observation fails to
improve symptoms. Most patients improve quickly, provided red-flag conditions are ruled
out. There are a few exceptions:
●
X-ray is required for most traumatic situations to rule out fracture. There may be
exceptions involving minor trauma.
●
Stress films of the AC joints (views of both shoulders, with and without the patient
holding 15-lb weights) are typically not needed because the disorder is usually clinically
obvious. Stress films may help differentiate between Grade 1 and 2, but have little utility as
both are treated non-operatively. It may be indicated if the clinical diagnosis is AC joint
separation and examination, and standard radiographs are inconclusive.
●
If an initial or recurrent shoulder dislocation presents in the dislocated position,
shoulder films before and after reduction are indicated. Post reduction films (lateral axillary
view) must clearly demonstrate that the humeral head is reduced.
●
Persistent shoulder pain, associated with neurovascular compression symptoms
(particularly with abduction and external rotation), may indicate the need for an AP cervical
spine radiograph to identify a cervical rib and electrodiagnostic testing for nerve injury.
●
The threshold for obtaining x-rays whenever there is an unusual clinical presentation
should also be particularly low. This includes symptoms suggestive of potential intraabdominal or cardiac problems presenting as shoulder problems, as well as neoplasias.
Subsequent, additional indications include:
●
Traumatic injury with shoulder weakness suggesting rotator cuff tear.
●
Traumatic shoulder dislocation in patients over age 40 – high incidence of
concomitant rotator cuff tear.
●
Physiologic evidence of tissue insult or neurovascular dysfunction (e.g., cervical root
problems presenting as shoulder pain, weakness from a massive rotator cuff tear, or
presence of edema, cyanosis or Raynaud’s phenomenon).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

26

●
Failure to respond to treatment as expected.
●
Failure to progress in a strengthening program intended to avoid surgery.
●
Clarification of the anatomy prior to an invasive procedure (e.g., a full thickness
rotator cuff tear not responding to non-operative treatment).
There are considerable methodological weaknesses among the studies of diagnostic tests
that include small sample sizes, incomplete assessments of the patients with all tests under
consideration, frequent use of retrospective methods, utilization of arthrography for gold
standard comparison, and inclusion of patients who had previously been evaluated with the
same test or procedure (79). These weaknesses provide substantial concerns about the
accuracy of reported test performance characteristics such as sensitivity, positive predictive
value, and likelihood ratios. Quality, head-to-head comparisons of diagnostic tests are
extremely rare, making quality comparisons between the available diagnostic tests difficult
(79)
. Lastly, relying solely on imaging studies to evaluate the source of shoulder symptoms
carries a significant risk of diagnostic confusion, especially false-positive test results, since
there is a high probability of identifying a finding that was present before symptoms began
(for example, degenerative partial thickness rotator cuff tears), and therefore may have no
temporal association with the symptoms.
Routine testing (e.g., laboratory tests, plain-film radiographs of the shoulder) and more
specialized imaging studies are not recommended during the first 4 to 6 weeks of activity
limitation due to non-traumatic shoulder symptoms, except when a red flag noted on
history or examination raises suspicion of a serious shoulder condition, calcific tendinitis, or
referred pain. Cases of impingement syndrome are similarly managed.
MRI is especially indicated for imaging soft tissues, particularly including rotator cuff and
labral structures. CT is typically more helpful for imaging bony in the shoulder beyond that
which is assessable by radiographs, e.g., select patients with osteonecrosis and shoulder
dislocation. Earlier imaging with MRI is indicated among those with suspected acute tears of
the rotator cuff, especially among younger workers and/or those with functional deficits.
Laboratory studies, such as liver or gallbladder function tests and tests for pelvic disease,
may be useful to determine if pain is being referred to the shoulder from a
subdiaphragmatic source. Electrocardiography and possibly cardiac enzyme studies may be
needed to clarify apparent referred cardiac pain. Chest radiographs may be needed to
elucidate shoulder pain that could be the result of pneumothorax, apical lung tumor, or
other apical disease such as tuberculosis. An erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR),
complete blood count (CBC), and tests for autoimmune diseases (such as rheumatoid factor)
can be useful to screen for inflammatory or autoimmune sources of joint pain.

WORK-RELATEDNESS
A determination of work-relatedness is straightforward among those with a significant
traumatic workplace event (e.g., substantial slip, trip, fall, or accident). Acute occupational
shoulder injuries are related to a specific acute traumatic event – these are noncontroversial if the effects are immediate and visible. Physicians should nevertheless clearly
document those events and injuries to help support the claim for worker’s compensation.
The remainder of this section considers those without an acute, significant event. Please
also see the Work-relatedness Guideline.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

27

A thorough work history is important to help establish work-relatedness (see General
Approach to Initial Assessment and Documentation Guideline for components of work
history). Most jurisdictions request an expert opinion as to whether a disease or disorder
should be considered work-related for the purpose of workers’ compensation. The
physician’s role is to supply opinion based on medical evidence. The “medical/scientific”
answer and the “legal” answer as determined by regulations and case law precedents in a
particular jurisdiction (workers’ compensation system) often differ. However, in most
jurisdictions, the level of evidence is preponderance (more likely than not or over 50%). The
best medical decisions are made with support from medical literature and decisions are
more supportable with the assignment of a clear diagnosis. Physicians have an ethical
responsibility not to simply advocate for their patients (215). Although most physicians should
not be expected to know case law in their state/jurisdiction, they should know that most
non-traumatic shoulder disorders involve underlying chronic disease conditions and workrelatedness is often unclear. Lack of clarity and inconsistency in epidemiologic studies
decreases the certainty as to whether a workers’ compensation claim is supported by
medical evidence.
Most epidemiological studies of shoulder disorders are retrospective and either include
body regions beyond the shoulder (such as the interscapular region) (86,216-245), combine
shoulder pain with neck pain (30,35,40,217,218,226,228,231,232,238,243,246-285), rely solely on subjective
data (such as questionnaires for disease and/or exposure data) (33,286-291), or fail to measure
the physical factors associated with the job (237,292-298). This produces considerable
uncertainty in these data; statements referable to or actions resulting from these studies
should reflect the weakness of the evidence. For most disorders, there is insufficient
evidence to conclude causal occupational associations.
No quality ergonomic assessment tools have been developed and validated to establish
work-relatedness. For the distal upper extremity, the Strain Index (299-301) appears to be the
most reliable tool. It has been reported to have some predictive power for shoulder
disorders (301,302) despite including some components such as hand/wrist posture that are
presumably irrelevant. Force is believed to be the major risk for shoulder disorders (288,303307)
, which may provide some basis for ergonomic assessments of jobs. The lack of quality
ergonomic-epidemiological studies combined with the lack of quality ergonomic job
assessment tools is markedly limiting for purposes of both prevention of disorders as well as
assessments of work-relatedness of individual cases.
Rotator Cuff-related Disorders
(including tendinoses, partial- and full-thickness tears, impingement syndrome, and
subacromial bursitis)
Risk factors for rotator-cuff related disorders are not well-defined. There are no large
prospective cohort studies that include physical examinations and detailed job physical
exposure measurements to compare, contrast, or quantify purported job physical factor
risks. There also are no quality studies of bursitis and few of impingement syndrome. In the
absence of other evidence or disorders (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis), it is suggested the
following discussion of shoulder tendinopathies applies to those conditions (i.e.,
impingement syndrome, subacromial bursitis).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

28

Shoulder tendinopathies were increased in a cross-sectional study of shipyard welders (308)
and another study of shipyard plate workers (309). However, both studies were limited by
retrospective methods without adjustments for potential confounders. EMG evidence of
supraspinatus fatigue was found with overhead shipyard welding (310). A small case-control
study of shoulder tendinitis cases found elevated risks among those with hand use at or
above the shoulder (311). Another case-control study which measured job physical factors
found elevated risks among those with frequent activity and abduction or forward flexion
more than 60º (259). Another found force to be associated with increased risk (297). A
moderately large cross-sectional study reported 5-fold increased risks for a composite of
multiple shoulder disorders (e.g., rotator cuff tendinosis, frozen shoulder, acromioclavicular
and glenohumeral degenerative joint disease) among those with using high force or high
repetition (312).
A problem with many studies is that factors such as force and repetitiveness are not clearly
specified and infrequently measured. Two studies that did specify and measure (32,218)
defined repetitive shoulder use as tasks that entail cycle times of four seconds or less (≤4s),
and forceful shoulder use as the application of at least 10 pounds or at least 10% of maximal
voluntary contraction force.
Other cross-sectional studies found elevated risks of rotator cuff syndrome among sewing
machine operators (217), grocery checkers (313), and fish processing workers (128). A
population-based registry study of fishery workers found elevated risks for rotator cuff
syndrome (314). A cross-sectional study from a retrospective cohort found elevated risks of
shoulder impingement syndrome among meat processing workers (298). Another large crosssectional study that included ergonomic assessments found high force and repetition to be
associated factors of up to 3- to 4-fold magnitudes (315). Workers with higher force
requirements appear to have increased risk of shoulder tendinosis, rotator cuff tears, and
impingement syndrome when identified in large administrative databases (80,316,317).
One prospective cohort study suggested high-hand force was associated with an increased
risk of rotator cuff tendinosis (32,104,303). However, not all data support that supposition (33,57).
High force and high repetition, and repetition alone (318,319) are reported risk factors
(64,307,315,320,321)
. Other data suggest working with the hands above the shoulder is a risk
(34)
factor . Other data suggested either long duration of shoulder flexion (32) or arm
abduction are risk factors (321). However, these results are not consistent among studies.
Other studies have not found elevated risks of shoulder tendinitis, including one of assembly
line packers (322) and others of manufacturing workers (323), sewing machine workers (323),
heavy work (324), bricklayers (38), rockblasters (38), and data entry workers (325). a A prospective
cohort study to evaluate risks of shoulder postures found large within-group variance in
exposures and an inability to detect postural risks for shoulder disorders (315). Another
prospective cohort study evaluating working postures found postural variations were
associated with musculoskeletal symptoms throughout the body (247). A prospective cohort
of baggage handlers found longer cumulative years of employment was associated with
subacromial shoulder disorders (326). One small cohort found increased risk of shoulder pain
among those with increased measured arm elevation (327). Unaccustomed use is believed to
be a risk factor, particularly involving forceful use that the individual does not normally
perform.
Psychosocial factors have been associated with the presentation of rotator cuff tendinitis,
including self-perception of poor health (40,328,329). However, most studies of psychosocial
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

29

factors evaluated combined neck-shoulder disorders or shoulder girdle pain. These studies
found risks that included stress (40,219,330), somatization (331,332), job demand
(63,218,263,288,321,333,334)
, high distress (218,335,336,337), high psychological demand
(288,307,321,338,339,340)
, low job control (32,37,63,218), job strain (235,280,341), low social support
(40,218,340,342)
, job dissatisfaction (331,342,343), depressive symptoms, effort-reward imbalance
(344,345)
, low job security (32,63), smoking (39,40,346), living alone with children (40), low
socioeconomic status (328), and work organizational issues (347,348). Risks of disability were
higher among foreign-born workers and women in a Swedish population-based prospective
cohort study (349). Reduction in risk of shoulder and neck pain has been reported with
regular leisure time physical activity (334). However, another study suggested inconclusive
evidence of the relationship between physical capacity and risk of shoulder pain (350). A
Finnish study reported increased risk of early retirement particularly among those with both
heavy physical work combined with low cardiorespiratory fitness (351).
Non-occupational risks for rotator cuff-related disorders: Rotator cuff disorders are not
characterized by frank inflammation; however, inflammatory mediators may be present in
rotator cuff tear, tendinitis, and impingement patients. These include increased: interleukin1 (352,353,354), interleukin-6 (354,355), interleukin-8 (356), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (352,354), basic
fibroblast growth factor (352,357), transforming growth factor (352,357), metalloproteinases (354),
CD2-positive T-lymphocytes (358), tenascin-C (359), substance P (360), and vascular endothelial
growth factor (361). It is unknown whether these factors precede or are a consequence of the
disease processes. Associations have been found between severity of musculoskeletal
disorders (MSDs) and inflammatory mediators (362).
Some factors increase risk for shoulder pain and rotator cuff-related disease including
obesity (31,32,33,35,36,339,363,364), smoking (31,37,38,39,40,365,366,367,368), hypercholesterolemia (369),
hyperlipidemia (370,371,372,373), diabetes mellitus (34,321,339,364,370,374,375,376), and atherosclerotic
disease risks (36,51). These factors may be reduced with active exercise and lipid-lowering
therapy (33,373). Genetic factors are also reported risks (377,378,379). Evidence increasi0ngly
supports cardiovascular disease as a mechanism for the development of rotator cuff
tendinitis and tears (29,380).
The prevalence of full-thickness rotator cuff tears in asymptomatic individuals over age 50 is
reported to be 6 to 51% (46,56,57). In cadavers, 23. 1% had partial or full-thickness tears (54). A
systematic review (54) exploring the frequencies of rotator cuff tears in asymptomatic and
symptomatic persons resulted in aggregate findings, which are summarized in the table
below. When comparing the frequency of symptomatic to asymptomatic rotator cuff tears
revealed on diagnostic imaging, as many as half of tears, particularly if partial-thickness, may
not be the pain generator.
Table 5. Prevalence of Rotator Cuff Tears in Asymptomatic and Symptomatic Persons As
Detected by Ultrasound and MRI
Technique

Asymptomatic/

Number of Scans

Symptomatic
Ultrasound

asymptomatic

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

591

Prevalence of Tears (%)
Any

Partial

Full

38. 9

17. 2

21. 7

30

Technique

Asymptomatic/

Number of Scans

Symptomatic

MRI

Prevalence of Tears (%)
Any

Partial

Full

symptomatic

1038

41. 4

6. 7

34. 7

asymptomatic

271

26. 2

15. 9

10. 3

symptomatic

490

49. 4

8. 6

40. 8

The prevalence of any asymptomatic tear was approximately 40%, with symptomatic tears
occurring from about the same to nearly double the frequency, depending on the method of
detection used. Age is a major risk factor for tendinitis and full and partial-thickness rotator
cuff tears (7,10,13,32,34,44-46,54,56-68,193,381,382). One study suggests age, BMI, repetitive work, and
diabetes are all associated with higher risk for bilateral rotator cuff tears compared to
monolateral tears (382). Risk is greater on the dominant side (32,57,58,383), although that is not a
universal finding (45). Smoking is a risk factor for accelerated speed of a degenerative tear
(384)
.
Tears of the supraspinatus tendon have been associated with tears of the remaining rotator
cuff tendons, including the subscapularis (61), as well as bicipital tendon tears (385,386). The
prevalence of Type II and III acromions rises with age and is associated with rotator cuff
pathology and tears in asymptomatic (46,47) and symptomatic patients (387). However
acromion type may not impact rotator cuff repair (388). Over age 70, the prevalence of Type II
and III acromions is 80 to 93% (45,46). Evidence also suggests a relatively weak association
between cuff tears and acromial types. One study suggests there is a higher risk of rotator
cuff tear for those with Type III acromions compared to Type I or II (389). The reliability of
classifying acromial type is poor, although large spurs have been associated with a higher
risk of tear (390).
Degenerative processes tend to occur in both shoulders (66). Risk factors reported for
degenerative processes include heredity (378), ankylosing spondylitis (391), rheumatoid
arthritis, crystal diseases (e.g., gout, pseudogout, hydroxyapatite), trauma (57), and sports
activities (38).
There is evidence to suggest that preoperative expectations for rotator cuff issues are
associated with surgical recovery outcomes (392). Fear avoidant beliefs have been
prospectively shown to be related to risk of sick leave for workers with musculoskeletal pain
(393)
. Sleep disturbance among workers with neck-shoulder pain predicted sickness absence
at 5 years (394) and was a risk for neck-shoulder-arm pain in a large cohort (395).
Acromioclavicular (AC) Sprain, Separation, and Dislocation
AC joint sprains and separations are mostly reported in sports from blows to the shoulder or
falls (396,397,398,399,400,401,402,403,404,405,406,407); predominately among young males in the second
and third decades of life (65). Some AC injuries may occur as a result of occupational injuries
including falls. Shoulder separation should be visible, or at least documentable, by
radiographic study.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

31

Acromioclavicular (AC) and Glenohumeral Arthrosis
The shoulder may be affected by osteoarthrosis (408). In symmetrical cases, an occupational
basis is difficult to identify. There are no consistent findings of one job type or class to be
associated with shoulder arthroses involving either joint. There is also a strong propensity
towards osteoarthrosis to develop in other joints in the body once an individual has already
developed symmetrical arthrosis in another body region, likely signifying genetic or other
systemic predispositions (systemic osteoarthrosis) (409-417). Age is a clear osteoarthrosis risk
(50,418,419)
. All joints are susceptible to involvement with systemic rheumatological conditions,
also including rheumatoid arthritis (420). Joints are also affected by crystal arthropathies
including gout and pseudogout. Obesity may act through a systemic mechanism (421,422,423).
Anatomic evidence of AC joint arthrosis is common, with an estimated prevalence of 29% of
cadavers that included apparent age-related effects (50), as well as more AC arthrosis on the
right side (419). Elevated risks of acromioclavicular arthrosis have been reported in fishprocessing workers (128), bricklayers (424), and those active in sports (38). Few epidemiological
studies have reported quantified exposure-disease outcomes for glenohumeral arthroses
and so work-relatedness is unclear; however, some cases may occur after work-related
fractures and thus may more clearly be considered occupational. A history of shoulder
dislocation and operative treatment are associated with increased risk for glenohumeral
arthritis (425).
Adhesive Capsulitis
Most cases of adhesive capsulitis are idiopathic. Although some persons may claim to
develop pain or limited mobility after a minor injury and subsequently be assigned a
diagnosis of adhesive capsulitis, there are currently no quality studies demonstrating this
cause and effect. Adhesive capsulitis may occur due to systemic risk factors. Calcific
tendinitis, rotator cuff tendinitis, bicipital tendinitis, impingement syndrome, fractures,
dislocation, and osteoarthritis have been shown to be associated factors in a large
population-based case-control study of 24,414 patients (426). Some patients develop
adhesive capsulitis based on systemic risks such as age, female sex (426,427), obesity (428),
lower BMI (429), gout (430), diabetes mellitus (428,429,431,432), high sensitivity C-reactive protein
(431)
, and hypothyroidism (433,434). Shoulder contracture after surgery may present similarly to
adhesive capsulitis.
Fractures
All shoulder fractures, except for pathologic fractures, are the result of trauma. Fractures
are commonly due to sports, motor vehicle crashes, or occupational accidents (435). Fractures
in younger adults are more likely to involve higher energy trauma than those in the elderly,
potentially due to osteoporotic changes with aging. Falls are the most common cause of
shoulder fractures among the elderly (436).
Glenohumeral Dislocation, Instability

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

32

A first-time occurrence of dislocation in the context of a discrete violently traumatic
occupational event is work-related. Once a normal shoulder dislocates (i.e., there is an
absence of a congenital anomaly), the joint capsule and ligaments are permanently
stretched and the shoulder is prone to re-dislocate. Thus, in individuals with a prior history
of dislocation, there is an increased risk of re-dislocation and/or instability. Redislocation in
the absence of a significant work accident or event is non-occupational. There are fewer
clear cases in which there is prior instability but an occupational event that sometimes
results in the cases being considered work-related, depending on the magnitude of the
event. Multiple studies show that recurrence of shoulder dislocation is common in multiple
populations and clinical studies (437-445), with some studies of shoulder dislocation showing
the majority of persons who experienced shoulder dislocation had recurrence (440,442,446-448),
with re-dislocation rates up to 29% (449), 62% (446), and 68% (447), depending on the
population. Overall, the earlier (younger) the initial dislocation, the likelier re-dislocation
(437,448-452)
. Depending upon the patient’s age, glenohumeral dislocation can cause
substantial rotator cuff injury. Proprioceptive (position-sense) deficits might contribute to
shoulder instability and injury (446,447,453). It is unknown whether proprioceptive deficits
precede and dispose to injury or result from injury.
Labral Tears
There are no quality epidemiological studies on the causes of labral tears or the reasons
labral tears become symptomatic. Labral tears frequently accompany glenohumeral
dislocation (dislocated shoulder) (454,455). Shoulder and hip labral tears have been found to
coexist with each other in patients (456). A non-contrasted MRI study of 53 adults ages 45-60
with no shoulder pain history were interpreted as showing 55-72% of patients were
consistent with labral tear(s) (457). Another small prevalence study reported 20% of
asymptomatic shoulders have MRI evidence of labral tears and 20% of those with prior
shoulder pain have evidence of rotator cuff tears (458). The prevalence of labral tears on MRI
at the National Football League’s Combine was 14. 9% (459). Aging is a strong risk factor
(457,460,461)
.
Trigger Points/Myofascial Pain/Muscle Tension Syndromes
No quality epidemiological studies demonstrate a work relationship for myofascial pain and
trigger points. There is some evidence suggesting that certain cases of muscle tension
syndrome may be occupational and that this disorder may be related to myofascial pain
(40,231,234,238,462,463,464)
. However, the quality of studies reported has been suboptimal. True
risk factors are not well-defined (465). Myofascial pain is often assigned as work-related when
the pain arises in a body part subject to a clear occupational injury or when there is an
inciting event without prior history, the pain and signs are limited to one body region, and
are not bilateral or disseminated. Myofascial pain syndrome has been reported to be related
to years of sewing with higher prevalence in those inexperienced and those with long years
on the job (i.e., a U-shaped relationship) (40). Stress and anxiety have also been associated
with myofascial pain syndrome (40,466), with a few studies specifically assessing computer
workers in stressful situations (467,468). Myofascial trigger points are associated with migraine
and tension-type headaches (466,469), endometriosis (470), chronic pelvic pain (471),

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

33

temporomandibular joint pain (472), and head/neck surgery (473). Fibromyalgia is considered a
non-occupational condition and is reviewed in the Chronic Pain Guideline.
Thoracic Outlet Syndrome
There are no quality studies that address thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS). TOS is commonly
attributed to multiple underlying causes, including neurological compression, vascular
compression, scalene muscle tightness, and compression by the first thoracic rib or a
cervical rib (474,475). Thus, work-relatedness is unknown and cases without an identifiable
cause of compression are controversial (475-478). Some cases occur due to neurovascular
compression, including cervical ribs, and thus are congenital. Others occur due to sequelae
of trauma (e.g., scar tissue) or secondary to another shoulder disorder. Many occur without
a clear provoking cause, although some patients report worse symptoms at work (477,479).
However, reported worsening with activities or at work does not show a cause-and-effect
relationship.
Nonspecific Shoulder Pain
There are no quality studies documenting that non-specific shoulder pain is or is not an
occupational condition. Non-specific pain has been typically studied in ergonomicepidemiological investigations lacking a medical diagnostic component utilizing
questionnaires to ascertain a case definition of shoulder or neck/shoulder pain. Using these
methods, shoulder pain has been associated with keyboarding, lower educational
achievement, poorer self-reported physical fitness, manual handling, working with hands
above shoulder level, lifting above shoulder level, heavy lifting, and working with vibrating
tools (267,291,328,464,480-483). In non-specific shoulder pain, psychosocial issues including
depression and stress are more prevalent (34,291,482). There is evidence that non-specific
shoulder pain is also commonly related to sports, particularly swimming (484-490). Commonly,
non-specific shoulder pain is medically diagnosable as having a specific diagnosis either with
a thorough examination and/or with time.
a

Many of the epidemiological studies are sufficiently old that the work tasks likely are no longer performed or are substantially different
today. Regardless, these studies are included to provide the references of the exposures, not the job tasks, per se.

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
GENERAL APPROACH TO TREATMENT
Assuring that there are no red flags is the first concern. Next, the patient’s functional level
should be assessed, as a function-based treatment strategy is helpful. Activity levels and
simple exercises are often the next consideration as a central aim of a function-based
treatment strategy. Ice/heat may be prescribed. Nonprescription analgesics may provide
sufficient pain relief for most patients with shoulder pain. If treatment response is
inadequate (i.e., if symptoms and activity limitations continue) or the physician judges the
condition limitations to be more significant, prescribed pharmaceuticals or physical methods
may be added. Co-morbid conditions, invasiveness, adverse effects, cost, and physician and
patient preferences guide the choice of treatment. Initial care and comfort items may

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

34

include non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), acetaminophen, heat, exercises,
and/or advice on activities. Education about shoulder pain begins at the first visit.
Initial treatment should be guided by implementing conservative care supported by the
strongest evidence for treating the presumed diagnosis. For many disorders, there is no
high-quality evidence to guide treatment. If there is also no moderate-quality evidence to
guide treatment, the clinician should consider including non-invasive, convenient, and
inexpensive treatments that are widely accepted, but have not been subjected to RCTs or
crossover trials (e.g., pendulum exercises for acute shoulder pain patients to facilitate
recovery and prevent adhesive capsulitis). Careful consideration of the indications and
limitations described in the rationale for each recommendation is critical to understanding
the best application for each intervention. If treatment response is inadequate (that is, if
symptoms and activity limitations continue), other recommended treatments may be
considered. Physicians should consider the possibilities of diagnosed and previously
undiagnosed medical diseases such as diabetes mellitus and various arthritides.
The principal recommendations for assessing and treating patients with shoulder disorders
are as follows:
●
The initial assessment focuses on detecting indicators of potentially serious disease,
“red flags,” and making an accurate diagnosis.
●
In the absence of red flags, work-related shoulder disorders may generally be safely
and effectively managed by non-operative means. The focus is on the initial use of the most
efficacious treatment strategy or strategies, monitoring for progression and complications,
modifying treatment to facilitate the healing process, and facilitating return to work in a
modified- or full-duty capacity. Including patient’s treatment preferences may be helpful
(491)
.
●
Nonprescription analgesics (NSAIDS and acetaminophen) may provide sufficient pain
relief for most patients. If treatment response is inadequate (i.e., if symptoms and activity
limitations continue), incrementally expand treatment to include prescription medications,
treatment modalities such as physical or occupational therapy, steroid injections, and/or
surgery. Pain relief may be accomplished by activity modification, commonly limiting
shoulder activities to below shoulder level and limiting the weights lifted for those
significant exposure activities. a
●
Identifying the worker’s job tasks and functional goals, including returning to work,
can aid the formulation of an appropriate treatment plan and work restrictions.
●
Patients recovering from work-related shoulder injuries are encouraged to return to
modified work and normal activity levels as soon as their condition permits.
●
Nonphysical factors such as psychosocial, workplace, or socioeconomic problems
should be assessed early in and over the course of care and addressed in an effort to
prevent or resolve delayed recovery (492).
a

The most compromised biomechanical position for the shoulder in biomechanical experimental studies is 90
to 120° of abduction and forward flexion. Maintaining higher overhead height is less compromising to the
shoulder than lowering to 90° if the object cannot be lowered substantially (304,305,306).

EDUCATION
Education has been used to treat shoulder disorders (493-507)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

35

EDUCATION FOR SHOULDER DISORDERS
Recommended
Education is recommended for patients with shoulder disorders.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
All workers with shoulder disorders.
Benefits
Improved understanding of the disorder, which may improve compliance with the
therapeutic plan.
Harms
Negligible
Frequency/Dose/Duration
One or 2 appointments for educational purposes, often performed in conjunction with
treatment and/or therapy; may include information about self-care and rehabilitation; may
teach adaptive techniques and use of adaptive equipment (as indicated) to facilitate
continued participation in daily activities despite limitations. Additional appointments may
be needed if education is combined with physical therapy or occupational therapy
treatments. Follow-up educational visit(s) for more severe disorders as part of a progression
towards normal functional use is sometimes helpful.
Indications for discontinuation
Completion of 1-2 visits. Added appointments are occasionally needed for more severely
affected individuals.
Rationale
One moderate-quality trial appears to have largely focused on educational interventions,
although it also appears to have included exercises and have suffered a randomization
failure that may have biased towards the null (De Bruijn et al., 2007). There are no other
quality studies specifically evaluating efficacy of patient education for utility or necessity in
the treatment of shoulder disorders. Yet for many disorders, education (e.g., importance of
performing pendulum exercises, advancement of activity levels) appears essential. Some
clinicians accomplish this in the course of extended patient visits, while others routinely
refer patients to a physical or occupational therapist for education. Regardless of the
approach, a few appointments for educational purposes are recommended as a low-cost
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

36

treatment adjunct for many patients. The number of appointments is dependent on the
diagnosis, severity of the condition, and co-existing conditions. Although education is
usually incorporated as part of the overall treatment plan, an additional 1 or 2
appointments for purely educational purposes may be helpful midway through a treatment
course for the more severely affected patient.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar, without date limits using the following terms: Education;
shoulder, shoulder pain, shoulder disorders; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 132 articles in PubMed, 19,071 in Scopus, 129
in CINAHL, 1305 in Cochrane Library, 67,500 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 9 from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 4 from CINAHL, 0 from
Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources. Of the 17 articles
considered for inclusion, 4 randomized trials and 2 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens, then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ERGONOMIC INTERVENTIONS
Ergonomic interventions have been used to treat general shoulder disorders (291,508-532). In
order to facilitate recovery and prevent recurrence of shoulder disorders, the physician may
recommend work and activity modifications and/or ergonomic redesign of the workplace
(533)
. The employer’s role is crucial in facilitating the employee’s return to full duty activity.
The employer is responsible for accommodating activity limitations and preventing new or
further injury through reassignment of tasks in the short-term and ultimately instituting
ergonomic changes to how tasks are performed in the long-term. It may be desirable to
conduct an ergonomic analysis of the activities that may be contributing to the symptoms.
Keyboarding and computer (mousing) breaks have been used to treat shoulder disorders
(534,535)
. Forearm supports have been used to prevent neck and shoulder symptoms (536).
Ergonomic training in moderate- or high-risk manufacturing settings has been used for
shoulder disorders (521,537,538). Ergonomic training in office settings have been used for
musculoskeletal disorders (510-512,516,518,519,539,540-548). There are no quality validated
ergonomic instruments available for evaluating shoulder exposures (304-306,549-551).
Evaluations of force (weights of parts and tools lifted, moment arms, torque), duration of
exertion, and shoulder posture (forward flexion, abduction, horizontal reach) should be
assessed (306,552). Psychological factors such as organizational relationships and job
satisfaction should also be assessed. Modifications of activity, workstation redesign, or

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

37

organizational and management changes may be considered. Consultation with a certified
ergonomist, occupational or physical therapist, human factors engineer, or occupational
medicine physician is suggested.
ERGONOMIC INTERVENTIONS FOR SHOULDER DISORDERS, PARTICULARLY ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Ergonomic interventions are recommended in settings with combinations of risk factors
(e.g., high force combined with forward flexion and/or abduction and high repetition) to
reduce risk factors for rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Jobs with combinations of high force, high repetition, and forward flexion/abduction of 90+
degrees.
Benefits
Theoretical potential to reduce risk of (re)injury
Harms
Cost, job elimination, implementation of job changes that may not result in changes in injury
rates
Rationale
There are limited quality studies of ergonomic interventions for purposes of assessing
subsequent risks of specific shoulder injuries. Quality studies of ergonomics interventions
have been reported only for office settings (Rempel et al., 2006, Verhagen et al., 2006,
Rempel et al., 1999, Gerr et al., 2005, Tittiranonda et al., 1999). Nevertheless, in jobs with
high ergonomic factors, particularly combined high force, shoulder postures between 90
and 120 degrees of forward flexion or abduction and high-repetition, interventions are
recommended to reduce exposures (Garg et al., 2002, Garg et al., 2005, Garg et al., 2006,
Herbert et al., 2000).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Ergonomic
Interventions; shoulder, shoulder pain, shoulder disorders; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

38

retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 56 articles in PubMed, 45 in
Scopus, 11011 in CINAHL, 2 in Cochrane Library, 1,040 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 13 from PubMed, 7 from Scopus, 3 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 4 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 27 articles
considered for inclusion, 6 randomized trials and 9 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANDATORY TYPING POSTURE FOR PREVENTION OF SHOULDER DISORDERS
Not Recommended
Mandating a traditional sitting posture at a keyboard or desk with elbows, hips, and knees
at 90° of flexion is not recommended for prevention or treatment of shoulder/neck
disorders. Mandating any specific typing posture is not recommended. Instead, allowing
flexibility to choose comfortable typing posture(s) is recommended and may improve
workplace satisfaction.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Quality studies of ergonomics interventions have been reported only for office settings
(Rempel et al., 2006, Verhagen et al., 2006)(Rempel et al., 1999, Gerr et al., 2005,
Tittiranonda et al., 1999). Quality evidence has reported no beneficial effects of the 90degree typing posture (seated erect; feet on floor; knees, hips, and elbow joints all at 90degree angles), instead it has the same injury rates as a laid-back posture when examining
distal upper extremity disorders of neck/shoulder symptoms (Gerr et al., 2005). Thus, a
90/90 typing posture is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Typing Posture for
Prevention and Treatment; shoulder, shoulder pain, shoulder disorders; controlled clinical
trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 4 articles in PubMed, 0 in
Scopus, 10,971 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 15,700 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

39

from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources. Of the 2 articles
considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANDATORY TYPING POSTURE FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISORDERS
Not Recommended
Mandating a traditional sitting posture at a keyboard or desk with elbows, hips, and knees
at 90° of flexion is not recommended for prevention or treatment of shoulder/neck
disorders. Mandating any specific typing posture is not recommended. Instead, allowing
flexibility to choose comfortable typing posture(s) is recommended and may improve
workplace satisfaction.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Quality studies of ergonomics interventions have been reported only for office settings
(Rempel et al., 2006, Verhagen et al., 2006)(Rempel et al., 1999, Gerr et al., 2005,
Tittiranonda et al., 1999). Quality evidence has reported no beneficial effects of the 90degree typing posture (seated erect; feet on floor; knees, hips, and elbow joints all at 90degree angles), instead it has the same injury rates as a laid-back posture when examining
distal upper extremity disorders of neck/shoulder symptoms (Gerr et al., 2005). Thus, a
90/90 typing posture is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Typing Posture for
Prevention and Treatment; shoulder, shoulder pain, shoulder disorders; controlled clinical
trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 4 articles in PubMed, 0 in
Scopus, 10,971 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 15,700 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources. Of the 2 articles
considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

40

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
KEYBOARDING BREAKS FOR PRIMARY PREVENTION OR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER
DISORDERS
Recommended
Keyboarding and computer (mousing) breaks are recommended for primary prevention and
for patients with symptoms of shoulder disorders.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
All workers performing largely keyboarding work.
Benefits
Reduced fatigue. Theoretical possible reduction in injury.
Harms
Cost, wasted resources if ineffective.
Rationale
Quality studies of ergonomics interventions have been reported only for office settings
(Verhagen et al., 2006, Rempel et al., 1999, Gerr et al., 2005, Tittiranonda et al., 1999).
Breaks from computer typing have been addressed in a low-quality study that reported
reductions in symptoms, but no additional benefit from utilizing exercise during breaks (van
den Heuvel et al., 2003). Various types of breaks have been utilized including stretching
breaks and exercise programs (Lee et al., 1992, Galinsky et al., 2000, Carter et al., 1994,
Silverstein et al., 1988, Feuerstein et al., 2004, Fenety et al., 2002, Balci et al., 2004, Henning
et al., 1997). Quality evidence supporting the efficacy of breaks is weak, especially for
symptomatic patients (van den Heuvel et al., 2003, Galinsky et al., 2000). One low-quality
randomized study among an apparently asymptomatic population of temporary data-entry
workers suggested fewer symptoms among those taking breaks; however, compliance was
low (ranging from 25 to 39%). Breaks are not invasive, have no substantial adverse effects,
are low cost, and do not appear to impair productivity (van den Heuvel et al., 2003, Balci et

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

41

al., 2004, McLean et al., 2001, Henning et al., 1997, Balci et al., 2003, Floru et al., 1987,
Sauter et al., 1992, Kopardekar et al., 1994). Widespread use of these programs has not
been reported in quality studies; however, with no apparent significant cost impacts and
studies suggesting potential benefits, breaks are recommended for both primary prevention
and treatment of symptomatic patients.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Keyboarding
Break for Prevention and Treatment, keyboarding break; shoulder, shoulder pain, shoulder
disorders; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0
articles in PubMed, 0 in Scopus, 10,971 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 5,580 in Google
Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other
sources. Of the 2 articles considered for inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
FOREARM SUPPORT FOR TYPING TO PREVENT NECK/SHOULDER SYMPTOMS
Recommended
Forearm support for frequent computer keyboard users is recommended for potential
prevention of neck and/or shoulder symptoms.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Consider for all workers performing largely keyboarding work.
Benefits
Reduced fatigue. Theoretical possible reduction in injury.
Harms

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

42

Cost, wasted resources if ineffective.
Rationale
Quality studies of ergonomics interventions have been reported only for office settings
(Rempel et al., 2006, Verhagen et al., 2006, Rempel et al., 1999, Gerr et al., 2005,
Tittiranonda et al., 1999). Nevertheless, in jobs with high ergonomic factors, particularly
combined high force, shoulder postures between 90 and 120 degrees of forward flexion or
abduction and high-repetition, interventions are recommended to reduce exposures
(Herbert et al., 2000, Garg et al., 2002, Garg et al., 2005, Garg et al., 2006). Some evidence
suggests reductions in neck/shoulder symptoms might be realized through utilization of a
forearm support (Rempel et al., 2006); thus, forearm support is recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Forearm Support
for Typing and Prevention, forearm support; shoulder, shoulder pain, shoulder disorders;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 14 articles in
PubMed, 31 in Scopus, 10,980 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 582 in Google Scholar, and
0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 1
article considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ERGONOMICS TRAINING IN MODERATE- OR HIGH-RISK MANUFACTURING SETTINGS
Recommended
Ergonomics training is recommended in moderate- or high-risk manufacturing settings.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
All workers performing manual work, particularly with injury risks that include combined
high force, repetition, and posture of 90+ degrees of abduction and/or forward flexion.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

43

Benefits
Theoretical possible reduction in injury.
Harms
Cost, wasted resources if ineffective.
Indications for discontinuation
Able to demonstrate knowledge.
Rationale
Quality studies of ergonomics interventions have been reported only for office settings
(Verhagen et al., 2006, Rempel et al., 1999, Gerr et al., 2005, Tittiranonda et al., 1999).
Nevertheless, in jobs with high job physical demands for the shoulder, particularly combined
high force, shoulder postures between 90 and 120 degrees of forward flexion or abduction
and high-repetition, interventions are recommended to reduce exposures (Herbert et al.,
2000, Garg et al., 2002, Garg et al., 2005, Garg et al., 2006).
There is no quality evidence regarding the use of ergonomics training, it is thought to be
beneficial in high-risk settings. One study suggested that training is inferior to a combination
of other interventions in an office setting (Rempel et al., 2006) and another found benefits
for the neck, but not distal upper extremity (Ketola et al., 2002). An RCT comparing wrist
splinting with ergonomic education found splinting superior (Werner et al., 2005). If there is
a benefit of ergonomic training, it may be modest. Training should consist of quality
information.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Ergonomic
Training in Manufacturing Settings, ergonomic training, manufacturing, ergonomics;
shoulder, shoulder pain, shoulder disorders, manufacturing facilities; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 40 articles in PubMed, 0 in
Scopus, 10,980 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 144 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 3 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 4 articles
considered for inclusion, 3 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

44

reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ERGONOMICS TRAINING FOR PREVENTION OF MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDERS IN OFFICE
SETTINGS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of ergonomics training for the
prevention of MSDs in office settings.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
While quality evidence is lacking regarding the use of ergonomics training, it is thought to be
beneficial in high-risk settings. One study suggested that training is inferior to a combination
of other interventions in an office setting (Rempel et al., 2006) and another found benefits
for the neck, but not distal upper extremity (Ketola et al., 2002). An RCT comparing wrist
splinting with ergonomic education found splinting superior (Werner et al., 2005). If there is
a benefit of ergonomic training, it may be modest. Training should consist of quality,
evidence-based information (e.g., force is the most important risk factor, not rotely
prescribing a 90/90 typing posture).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: ergonomic
training, ergonomics, office, ergonomic intervention; shoulder, shoulder pain, shoulder
disorders; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed
54 articles in PubMed, 238 in Scopus, 11,500 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 5,930 in
Google Scholar, and 7 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 11 from PubMed, 6
from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 7 from
other sources. Of the 26 articles considered for inclusion, 17 randomized trials and 4
systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

45

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS
Return-to-work programs have not been well studied among patients with shoulder
disorders. Generally, these programs include gradual increase in shoulder use, especially
focusing on strength, repetition, and endurance. Several studies suggest that a job’s physical
demands, lack of job accommodation, and psychosocial conditions are the most important
factors in predicting work disability (553,554,555). Return-to-work interventions have been used
for those diagnosed with a shoulder disorder (556,557,558,559,560,561,562,563,564).
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAMS FOR TREATMENT OF SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC SHOULDER
DISORDERS
Recommended
Return-to-work programs are recommended for treatment of subacute or chronic shoulder
disorders, particularly in patients with significant lost time.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Patients with subacute or chronic shoulder disorders who have completed acute treatment.
Generally, should have attempted at least 1 trial of return to work that was unsuccessful.
May also have trialed a second, more graded return to work, both of which were
unsuccessful. (Acute pain patients generally resolve and do not require a formal return to
work program.)
Benefits
Earlier return to work (RTW).
Harms
Negligible.
Indications for discontinuation
Achievement of RTW status.
Rationale
There are no quality studies that review the types of return-to work programs typically
found in the United States. There is one quality study from Spain (Abasolo et al., 2007);
however, the patients had spine disorders and the program otherwise may have limited
applicability due to longstanding, early active management of these issues in the United

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

46

States. Thus, this study has limited if any applicability to the United States. These programs
are thought to reduce morbidity and improve function. They are not invasive, have minimal
potential for adverse effects, and are not costly. Return-to-work programs are
recommended for management of select patients with shoulder disorders with lost time
and may be helpful for proactive emphases on functional recovery.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Return to Work,
RTW, Job Re-Entry; shoulder, shoulder pain, shoulder disorders; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 55 articles in PubMed, 1,607 in
Scopus, 35 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane Library, 51,700 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 6 from PubMed, 3 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 9 articles
considered for inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 3 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

WORK ACTIVITY MODIFICATIONS
Work activity modifications are often necessary during the treatment course for patients
with acute, subacute, and chronic shoulder pain, regardless of cause. Advice on work and
non-work-related limitations should be specific, rather than “light duty. ” A paradigm of risk,
capability, and tolerance has been published by American Medical Association, and while
risk and capability may be relatively well understood, tolerance is difficult and often
integrally connected with behavioral attributes (565). When the worker’s tolerance is too low,
and especially when tolerance does not improve with time and progress, work limitations
are needed to be advanced beyond the usual “as tolerated” prescription.
Advice on how to avoid exacerbating activities that at least temporarily increase pain
includes a review of work duties. Continuing some activities helps prevent weakness,
atrophy and mobility loss. Sometimes, workers have sufficient self-directed flexibility in
their work duties such that formal limitations may not be needed, as they can adapt and
incorporate the medical advice on limitations into their daily work tasks. Most of the time,
modifications in limitations must be written out for the employer. Slings should be avoided
for anything other than for clear indications (e.g., AC separation, AC high-grade sprain).
Gentle ROM exercises (e.g., pendulum) should be performed at least twice daily, even when
a sling is provided. Patients should avoid work activities that precipitate or significantly
increase symptoms during the acute phase of treatment, but should continue general
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

47

activities of daily living as tolerated (see caveat regarding tolerance above, whereby
insufficient tolerances should result in replacement of the words “as tolerated” with specific
activities to perform, modify, or not perform). Every attempt should be made to maintain
patients at the maximal levels of activity, including work, hobbies, and sports activities as it
is in the patient’s best interest (566). Poorer prognosis with longer persistence of pain has
been associated with slower onset of pain, higher pain severity at presentation, and longer
duration of symptoms (318,567).
The first step in determining whether work-activity modifications are required usually
involves a discussion with the patient regarding the nature of job tasks and the overall job
physical demands (568). In such cases where the worker can make modifications, e.g., reduce
shoulder torque by lifting of a box after pulling the box to the shelf edge or receive
assistance to lift a box or reduce reaching, there may be no requirement to write any
restrictions even if strength, ROM, or pain are limiting. In some situations, it may be
advisable to confirm this report with the patient’s supervisor to signal that the person is
under treatment.
In most cases, specified limitations may be a better treatment strategy. Assessment of work
activities and potential for modifications may also be facilitated by a worksite visit and
analysis by a clinician with appropriate training (e.g., physician, occupational therapist,
physical therapist, or ergonomist). Despite their limitations, ergonomic guidelines should be
considered when assigning activity limitations.
Work limitations should be tailored by considering the following factors: 1) job physical
requirements; 2) the safety of the tasks in consideration of the diagnosed condition, age,
and relevant biomechanical limitations; 3) severity of the problem; 4) work organizational
issues (overtime, work allocation, wage incentives); and 5) the patient’s understanding of
the condition. Sometimes it is necessary to write limitations or to prescribe activity levels
that are above what the patient is comfortable doing, particularly when the patient wants to
avoid all activity. In such cases, the physician should be careful not to overly restrict the
patient; education about the problem of pain itself causing disability and the need to remain
active should be provided.
It is best to communicate early in the treatment that limitations will be progressively
reduced as the patient progresses. Experienced physicians communicate the intended
changes in restrictions for the coming week (similar to forecasting increases in exercise
program components) at the current visit to reduce the element of surprise and help
actively facilitate the patient’s most important elements of an active, functional restoration
program. Tailoring restrictions is required in nearly all patients with chronic shoulder pain as
there is great variability in symptoms and dysfunction. The employer should also be
consulted when developing strategies to expedite and support integrating the patient back
into the workplace (see Low Back Disorders). The physician can make it clear to patients and
employers that:
●
Patients sometimes have increased pain performing almost any function (even light
duty) early in rehabilitation;
●
Increases in symptoms should be heard with -empathy, and factors which are
associated with significant increases in pain should be addressed;
●
Increases in pain do not equate to injury;

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

48

●
Any restrictions are intended to allow for time to build activity tolerance through
exercise and work reconditioning; and
●
Where appropriate, it may help to mention to the patient that this rehabilitative plan
will also help the patient regain normal non-occupational activities.
The following are common limitations that may be needed for acute shoulder pain patients:
●
No lifting more than 10 pounds (this may require adjusting up or down based
primarily on the patient’s pre-morbid capabilities and the severity of the condition).
●
Avoid more than 60º abduction or forward flexion. Although not necessarily
anatomically correct, this is sometimes described as avoiding lifting with the hands above
shoulder height to facilitate implementation.
●
Some additionally required limitations such as avoiding static use or highly repetitive
use.
The physician may also need to educate the employer that:
●
Even moderately heavy (more than 20 pounds) unassisted lifting or repeated work at
“shoulder level” (90° forward or sideways) or overhead may increase shoulder symptoms
due to rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tears, inflammatory conditions, ligament
sprains, or impingement syndrome.
●
Any restrictions are intended to allow for spontaneous recovery or time to (re)build
activity tolerance through graded exercise.
As rehabilitation progresses, a gradual reduction in activity limitations is recommended to
facilitate full recovery. This generally involves progressive advancement such as no lifting
more than 15 pounds for 1 to 2 weeks, then no lifting more than 20 pounds, etc., until the
patient returns to normal activities. This is often accomplished in concert with supervised
physical or occupational therapy, use of functional activities and/or home exercise
program(s). MDGuidelines provides recommended durations for activity modification after
an initial injury. They are targets to provide a guide from the perspective of physiologic
recovery and may assist in focusing on return of function (556). Orthopedic surgeons and
other specialists often see patients who have failed initial non-operative management and
thus might have more patients who fall outside expected targets. For example, postoperative shoulder patients often require greater initial limitations, such as no lifting of any
weight and no use of the arm with gradual increased activity.

ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The following section contains recommendations for evaluating and managing Shoulder
Disorders from the Evidence-Based Shoulder Disorders Panel. These recommendations are
based on critically appraised higher-quality research evidence or, when such evidence was
unavailable or inconsistent, on expert consensus as required in ACOEM’s Methodology.
Recommendations are made under the following categories:
●

Strongly Recommended, “A” Level

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

49

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Moderately Recommended, “B” Level
Recommended, “C” Level
Insufficient – Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – No Recommendation (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – Not Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Not Recommended, “C” Level
Moderately Not Recommended, “B” Level
Strongly Not Recommended, “A” Level

OVERVIEW
Degenerative tendinopathy is the primary pathology underlying this closely related group of
disorders, whether these conditions are primarily related to aging, insufficient vascular
supply to the tendon (29,31-39,51,569-572), and/or mechanical impingement (44). True
myotendinous junction strains are exceedingly rare, estimated at 0. 47% of cases (573). Some
have also reported that the symptomatic tears have neovascularization in the critical zone
area that has poor blood supply to the tendon which is susceptible to tears (27), some have
reported this in calcific tendinitis (574), although others have failed to confirm this finding
(575)
. The majority of rotator cuff tears initiate in the supraspinatus tendon. They can extend
posteriorly into the infraspinatus and teres minor or be associated with subscapularis tears.
Subscapularis tears can present in isolation. The supraspinatus tendon is prone to
degeneration such that it appears that most people develop degenerative tendons over a
lifetime (7,10,13,32,34,44,46,53-68,193). Among those without shoulder problems, 15% reportedly
had full- and 20% had partial-thickness rotator cuff tears with the frequency of tears
increasing with age (56). Another study (59) found asymptomatic rotator cuff tears overall in
nearly one-quarter of the subjects with tears in 13% of the youngest (50 to 59 years), 20%
(60 to 69) and 31% (70 to 79) of the middle-aged, and 51% of the oldest (age >80 years);
that study concluded that rotator cuff tears should be regarded as “normal’ degeneration,
not necessarily causing pain and functional impairment. ” A systematic review exploring the
frequencies of rotator cuff tears in asymptomatic and symptomatic persons resulted in
aggregate findings are summarized in Table 5 (54). The prevalence of any asymptomatic tear
was approximately 40%, with symptomatic tears occurring from about the same to nearly
double the frequency, depending on the method of detection used.
Inflammatory biomarkers have been identified, including interleukin 1β, interleukin 6,
cyclooxygenase 2, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 9, and vascular endothelial growth
factor, and correlate with size of a rotator cuff tear (576-584). An inheritability index of 18% has
been calculated with shared environment of 44% and unique environment of 38% (585).
The supraspinatus tendon has been thought to be susceptible to mechanical impingement
within the subacromial space between the head of the humerus and the acromion process.
Thus, the term impingement syndrome is also popular, particularly when symptoms are
elicited with overhead use (44), but might not be primary cause of pathology in many rotator
cuff syndromes. Tendon and muscle overload on a background of vascular insufficiency is
currently thought to be the primary cause of rotator cuff related pathologies. The
subacromial and subdeltoid bursae overlie the rotator cuff tendons (586). Consequently,
bursitis or degenerative bursal changes often accompany these conditions.
Table 5. Prevalence of Rotator Cuff Tears in Asymptomatic and Symptomatic Persons As
Detected by Ultrasound and MRI
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

50

Adapted from (54).

Over a 5-year period, 51% of previously asymptomatic tears became symptomatic with a
mean of 2.8 years to onset of symptoms in subjects who had documented bilateral rotator
cuff tears with one side asymptomatic (587). The age of the newly found, asymptomatic tears
was unknown; however, the average time it took a tear to become symptomatic was over 2.
8 years. The relationship between one symptomatic shoulder and the eventual occurrence
of symptoms in the asymptomatic shoulder is unknown.
Among 123 patients with unilateral shoulder pain, it was found that nearly all of the findings
on MRI in the symptomatic shoulder were also present in the asymptomatic shoulder, with
only about 10% more full thickness tears and osteoarthrosis being more prevalent in the
symptomatic shoulders (588).

DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
Patients with rotator cuff tendinopathies have varying clinical presentations; thus, there are
no consensus diagnostic criteria that have proven highly accurate. Patients generally have
gradual onset, non-radiating glenohumeral joint pain. There are no distal paraesthesias.
Rotator cuff tears may present with either acute or gradual onset pain. Impingement signs
are often positive.
Research case definitions have included glenohumeral joint pain plus a positive
supraspinatus/empty can test (168) (589). Supraspinatus tendon is the most common rotator
cuff tears, and tests potentially useful for this diagnosis include resisted external rotation,
drop arm, painful arc, full can and empty can tests (213,590-591). Evidence to separate full- from
partial-thickness tears is weak, with the separation being reportedly difficult and such
determinations having poor reliability (79,592); one report suggested nearly all tests were
unhelpful and only abduction strength was associated with partial tears (593).
Patients are clinically diagnosed based on their history and physical examination. Additional
tests are frequently performed on initial evaluation for more severe presentations, but
often are not required in mild cases. X-rays are recommended and may be needed of both
shoulders, particularly if there is a bilateral injury or need for comparison with the
unaffected shoulder. Other studies are often helpful, including MRI and ultrasound,
especially for evaluation of potential rotator cuff tears (MRI or US) or SLAP tears (especially
MRI).

WORK LIMITATIONS

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

51

Patients with shoulder pain related to tendinopathies should generally be encouraged to
perform work activities within limitations of pain. However, some explicit limitations are
often needed, especially for more physically demanding work activities. Such limitations are
gradually reduced as recovery progresses and most commonly include limitations in heavy
lifting and forward flexion and abduction, especially beyond 60 degrees.* As the condition
improves, limitations should be reduced or eliminated. Patients with clinically significant
rotator cuff tears may need either surgery, or if non-operative management is planned (594596)
. longer duration of workplace limitations to allow for sufficient pain reduction and
recovery of sufficient strength. If surgery is performed, there is a similar need for workplace
limitations that are gradually reduced.

*It may be necessary to describe this as not lifting the hand above the shoulder or most commonly no
“overhead use. ” Also, 90 to 120° of abduction and forward flexion is the most compromised biomechanical
position for the shoulder in biomechanical experimental studies. Maintaining higher overhead height is less
compromising to the shoulder than lowering to 90° if the object cannot be lowered substantially (491,597,598).

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
ANTIBODIES
Numerous antibodies are markers for specific rheumatic diseases (e.g., rheumatoid factor,
anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-Sm, anti-Ro, anti-La for rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus
erythematosus, Sjogren’s, mixed connective tissue disorder, etc.). Patients with rheumatic
disorders are at increased risk for degenerative joint disease of the shoulder as well as
subacromial bursitis. Antibodies have been used for the diagnosis of rotator cuff
tendinopathies (599,600). However, ordering of a large, diverse array of anti-inflammatory
markers without targeting a few specific disorders diagnostically is not recommended.
ANTIBODIES TO CONFIRM SPECIFIC DISORDERS
Sometimes Recommended
Antibody levels are selectively recommended to evaluate and diagnose patients with
shoulder pain that have reasonable suspicion of rheumatological disorders including
inflammatory arthropathies.
Antibody levels are strongly recommended as a screen to confirm specific rheumatological
disorders when there are indications (e.g., symptoms and/or signs suggestive of rheumatoid
arthritis), but are generally not indicated for most patients with other specific soft tissue
musculoskeletal disorders, such as rotator cuff tendinopathies due to high false positive
rates in that non-specific diagnostic setting. Consultation with a rheumatologist may be
helpful when there is a known or suspected disorder.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Shoulder pain and a presumptive diagnosis of an inflammatory rheumatological disorder.
May include pain that fails to respond as would be expected, with or without findings in

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

52

other joints. Findings in other joints increases the probability that testing will be positive.
Testing is generally not indicated for most patients with rotator cuff tendinopathies. Testing
is also not generally indicated at initial symptoms presentation unless symptoms have been
present for at least a few weeks and/or are severe; otherwise, e.g., negative test results are
more likely as insufficient time is likely to have passed and may mislead.
Benefits
Secure an accurate diagnosis, which should then focus the treatment plan to more
efficacious treatments.
Harms
Potential for false-positive tests; however, that is generally minimal unless the pre-test
probability is low.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally only ordered one time. However, if the testing was performed early and there is
further disease persistence or progression, a second test is reasonable as more time may be
required for the antibody tests to become positive.
Rationale
Elevated antibody levels are highly useful for confirming clinical impressions of
inflammatory rheumatological diseases. However, routine use of these tests in shoulder
pain patients is not recommended, especially as wide-ranging, non-focused test batteries
are likely to result in inaccurate diagnoses due to false positives and low pre-test
probabilities. Clinicians should also be aware that false-negative results occur.
Measurement of antibody levels is minimally invasive, unlikely to have substantial adverse
effects, and is low to moderately costly depending on the specific test ordered. They are
recommended for focused testing of a limited number of diagnostic considerations.
However, ordering of a large, diverse array of antibody levels without targeting a few
specific disorders diagnostically is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Antibodies;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive
value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 9 articles in
PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match
tab to find and review 9 articles, 676 in Scopus, 2 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 119 in
Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

53

from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from
other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

NONSPECIFIC INFLAMMATORY MARKERS
There are many markers of inflammation that may be measured serologically in patients
(352,354,358-361,601)
. These include C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR), interleukins, cyclooxygenase 2, matrix metalloproteinases, vascular endothelial
growth factor, ferritin, and an elevated total protein-albumin gap. However, ordering of a
large, diverse array of anti-inflammatory markers without targeting a few specific disorders
diagnostically is not recommended.
NON-SPECIFIC INFLAMMATORY MARKERS FOR SCREENING FOR INFLAMMATORY
DISORDERS IN SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN
Sometimes Recommended
Serum measures of erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, creatine kinase
muscle, aldolase, hyaluronic acid, and other inflammatory markers are selectively
recommended for screening either inflammatory disorders with reasonable suspicion of
inflammatory disorder in patients with subacute or chronic shoulder pain or osteoarthrosis.
They are generally not indicated for patients with non-specific disorders, such as rotator cuff
tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Shoulder pain and a presumption of an inflammatory process. Pain that fails to respond as
would be expected, with or without findings in other joints. Findings in other joints
increases the probability that testing will be positive. Testing is generally not indicated for
most patients with rotator cuff tendinopathies. Testing is also not generally indicated at
initial symptoms presentation unless symptoms have been present for at least a few weeks
and/or are severe; otherwise, e.g., negative test results are more likely as insufficient time is
likely to have passed and may mislead.
Benefits

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

54

Identify whether an inflammatory process is likely, which may help focus on the need for
further testing to secure an accurate diagnosis.
Harms
Potential for false-positive tests; however, that is generally minimal unless the pre-test
probability is low.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally only ordered one time. However, if the testing was performed early, and there is
further disease persistence or progression, a second test is reasonable as the inflammatory
mediators may have needed additional time to become positive.
Rationale
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is the most commonly used systemic marker for nonspecific inflammation. It is elevated in numerous inflammatory conditions including
rheumatological disorders as well as infectious diseases. C-reactive protein (CRP) is a marker
of systemic inflammation that has been associated with an increased risk of coronary artery
disease. It is also a non-specific marker for other inflammation. Both ESR and CRP are also
markers of infection. Numerous inflammatory markers have been found to be elevated in
patients with musculoskeletal disorders but because it is not known whether these factors
precede or are a consequence of the disease processes, their utility in patient management
is unclear. Other non-specific markers of inflammation include elevated ferritin and an
elevated protein-albumin gap, neither of which have known clinical roles. Serological studies
for non-specific inflammatory markers are minimally invasive, have low risk of adverse
effects, and are low cost. They are recommended as a reasonable screen for systemic
inflammatory conditions especially if the patient also has other pain without clear definition
of a diagnosis or those with fibromyalgia or myofascial pain syndrome, although specificity is
not high. However, ordering of a large, diverse array of anti-inflammatory markers without
targeting a few specific disorders diagnostically is not recommended.
A large study found elevated biomarkers (C-reactive protein, creatine kinase muscle,
aldolase) are associated with osteoarthrosis compared with normal controls (Ganguly,
2019). Another study found elevated serum hyaluronic acid levels among both those with
either rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthrosis, although the HA levels were higher among
those with rheumatoid arthritis (Goldberg RL, 1991) and TNF alpha, IL-1B, IL-10 and IL-17
(Hussein et al., 2008). However, clear distinctions between these measures among those
with osteoarthrosis and inflammatory arthropathies is not apparent in the available
literature. Thus, the utility of these tests may be as potential screening for arthropathies
irrespective of inflammatory arthroses.
A high-quality, 7-year study of 880 elderly subjects evaluated impacts of IL-6 and CRP on
both cross-sectional associations with morbidity and long-term mortality (Taaffe DR, 2000).
CRP and IL-6 were higher among smokers at baseline and those with higher body mass
indexes (BMIs). IL-6 and CRP were also higher among those with hypertension, myocardial

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

55

infarction, stroke, glycosylated hemoglobin levels, HDL, and number of chronic conditions.
Both IL-6 and CRP were inversely related to quartiles of moderate and strenuous physical
activity. CRP and/or IL-6 were associated with incidence of hypertension, myocardial
infarction, diabetes, and incident cases of chronic conditions. Physical performance
measures of changes in grip strength, signature time, chair-rise and 6-m fast walk all were
not significant for IL-6 or CRP.
Serological studies for non-specific inflammatory markers are minimally invasive, have low
risk of adverse effects, and are low cost. They are recommended as a screen for systemic
inflammatory and osteoarthrosis conditions especially if the patient also has other pain
without clear definition of a diagnosis, although specificity is not high and these measures
tend to be elevated in both osteoarthrosis and inflammatory disorders, with higher levels
among those with inflammatory disorders. However, ordering of a large, diverse array of
anti-inflammatory markers without targeting a few specific disorders diagnostically is not
recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: blood
sedimentation, c reactive protein, procalcitonin, nonspecific inflammatory markers;
osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular
joint; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative
predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 6
articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using
Best Match tab to find and review 6 articles, 756 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 11,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. We considered for inclusion 0
from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 6 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 8 articles considered for inclusion, 5 diagnostic
studies and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria. †
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Cytokines;
osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular
joint; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative
predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 12
articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using
Best Match tab to find and review 12 articles, 1030 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane
Library, 12,000 in Google Scholar, and 0from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria. †
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: C-Reactive
Protein, Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate, Non-Specific Inflammatory Markers; rotator cuff
tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement
syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; diagnosis,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

56

diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value,
predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 35 articles in PubMed
using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to
find and review 37 articles, 61 in Scopus, 10 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane Library, 171 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

CYTOKINES
Cytokines have been used to attempt to diagnose problems with the rotator cuff (353,357,602609)
.
CYTOKINE TESTING FOR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN, INCLUDING ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Routine testing with or the use of batteries of cytokine tests is not recommended to
diagnose chronic shoulder pain, including rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Cytokines purportedly determine whether a patient is experiencing pain or has suffered a
toxicological insult. However, there are no quality studies that address this premise.
Available studies suggest that these markers may be elevated in chronic pain conditions, but
these studies did not have adequate control groups and did not control for potential
confounders. The range of disorders in which cytokines may be elevated also needs
definition, as the current range of conditions appears large (Taaffe DR, 2000, Martelletti,
1999, Perini, 2005, Covelli, 1991, Gratt, 2005, Alexander, 1998, Chen, 2004, Gur, 2002,
Madson, 1994), suggesting they are not specifically isolated to patients with chronic pain,
and thus the specificity of these tests seems likely to be quite low.
A high-quality, 7-year study of 880 elderly subjects evaluated impacts of IL-6 and CRP on
both cross-sectional associations with morbidity and long-term mortality (Taaffe DR, 2000).
CRP and IL-6 were higher among smokers at baseline and those with higher body mass
indexes (BMIs). IL-6 and CRP were also higher among those with hypertension, myocardial
infarction, stroke, glycosylated hemoglobin levels, HDL, and number of chronic conditions.
Both IL-6 and CRP were inversely related to quartiles of moderate and strenuous physical
activity. CRP and/or IL-6 were associated with incidence of hypertension, myocardial

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

57

infarction, diabetes, and incident cases of chronic conditions. Physical performance
measures of changes in grip strength, signature time, chair-rise and 6-m fast walk all were
not significant for IL-6 or CRP. Cytokines need to be rigorously studied to ascertain if there is
a place for them in the evaluation and/or management of chronic pain conditions, including
stratification for occupationally-relevant diseases.
Documentation that the discovery of elevated cytokine levels results in changes in
evaluation and/or clinical management is also necessary. Alternatively, this testing may be
useful if the absence of elevated cytokine levels would warrant concluding that a patient
does not have a remediable physical cause of shoulder pain. While cytokine testing is
minimally invasive, and has a low risk of adverse effects, these tests are high cost, with no
evidence that they alter the clinical management of patients with chronic shoulder pain.
Their place in the evaluation of patients with chronic shoulder pain is yet to be determined
and cytokine testing is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Cytokines,
Interleukins, Chemokines and lymphokines; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear,
shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis,
subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity,
positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy,
efficiency. We found and reviewed 56 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did
a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 76 articles, 545 in
Scopus, 12 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 218 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 5 from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 1
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 8 articles
considered for inclusion, 0 diagnostic studies and 2 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

X-RAYS
X-rays show bony structures and are the initial test for evaluation and diagnosis of many
cases of shoulder pain (50,610-619).
X-RAYS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN, INCLUDING ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

58

X-rays are recommended for evaluation of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Most patients with shoulder pain are candidates for x-rays, especially for significant trauma,
pain without trending towards improvement, impaired use, and those with red flags. Most
patients with rotator cuff tendinopathies do not require x-rays, although ongoing symptoms
warrant x-rays, especially to ascertain calcific tendinitis which has some differences in
management. Age has been found to be a potent predictor of increased degenerative
changes found on x-ray in the acromioclavicular joint (Bonsell et al., 2000). Reportedly, x-ray
has been helpful for diagnosing os acromiale in shoulder pain patients who were otherwise
thought to not have the condition (Burbank et al., 2007).
Benefits
Diagnosis of a fracture, calcific tendinitis, or otherwise latent medical condition(s).
Harms
Medicalization or worsening of otherwise benign shoulder condition; minor radiation
exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining x-rays once is generally sufficient with two to three views. For patients with
chronic shoulder pain, it may be reasonable to obtain a second set of x-rays later to reevaluate the patient’s condition, particularly if symptoms change.
Rationale
X-ray studies do not generally assess the value of x-rays in the diagnosis and management of
patients. Instead, most comparative studies including x-rays compare with MRI or US and
generally found the other diagnostic studies superior, especially for MRI. A few quality
studies suggest x-rays are helpful in the evaluation of rotator cuff tears (Zhang et al., 2016,
Hussain et al., 2018) and to evaluate most patients with shoulder pain, both to diagnose and
to assist with the differential diagnostic possibilities such as tendinopathies and arthroses.
However, x-rays are not necessary to manage most patients with rotator cuff
tendinopathies as they do not change the initial management; yet, x-rays are particularly
helpful for diagnosis of calcific tendinitis, which results in different treatment options if the
pain persists. They may also help to suggest soft tissue pathology, including large chronic
rotator cuff tears.
As x-ray has been performed for more than 120 years as a diagnostic procedure, it is
unsurprising that there is little quality evidence to support its use. The threshold for also

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

59

ordering x-rays of the cervical spine and/or elbow joint should be low, particularly if the
findings on shoulder x-ray are either normal or do not readily explain the degree of
abnormality. Patients with shoulder pain might show greater tuberosity osteopenia, cystic
degenerative changes, and spurring, thought to be a marker of chronicity of rotator cuff
tears (Cadet et al., 2008). Glenohumeral arthrosis is also more likely if there is a fullthickness rotator cuff tear (Gartsman et al., 1997). Plain radiographic findings are used to
stage disease involvement in osteonecrosis or humeral avascular necrosis. Early x-rays are
usually normal or have less distinct trabecular patterns since the living part of the bone does
not image (Harreld et al., 2009, Ficat, 1985). As the disease progresses, x-rays begin to show
osteoporotic areas, progressing to sclerotic areas and finally flattening and bony collapse
(Ficat, 1985, Bryant et al., 2002). X-rays are non-invasive, low to moderate costly, and have
little risk of adverse effects, and therefore are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Roentgenograms;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive
value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 1649 articles in
PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match
tab to find and review 2180 articles, 95 in Scopus, 104 in CINAHL, 57 in Cochrane Library, 96
in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 7 from PubMed,
1 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources. Of the 9 articles considered for inclusion, 4 diagnostic studies and 3
systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

DIAGNOSTIC ARTHROSCOPY
Arthroscopy has been used for diagnosis and as the initial part of a therapeutic surgical
treatment procedure, including rotator cuff tendinopathies (79,620-628).
DIAGNOSTIC ARTHROSCOPIC SURGERY FOR SHOULDER PAIN, INCLUDING ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Diagnostic arthroscopy is recommended for evaluation of select patients with shoulder pain
(see indications), including subsequent, definitive operative approaches including rotator
cuff tendinopathies.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

60

Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Rotator cuff tear with surgical indications and the expectation that surgical treatment will
immediately follow arthroscopy in the same procedure. This is commonly performed for
full-thickness rotator cuff tears which are thought to be acute and have accompanying
significant functional deficits. When there are fewer functional deficits and/or for partial
thickness tears, it is generally not performed until after at least 1 trial of physical or
occupational therapy (emphasizing exercises) and at least one glucocorticosteroid injection.
Arthroscopy is also commonly performed for: 1) labral tear with surgical indications (see
below); 2) impingement syndrome with surgical indications (see below); 3) glenohumeral
instability, 4) recurrent dislocations, 5) labral tears, 6) other moderate or severe shoulder
joint pain, acromioclavicular arthritis, or mechanical symptoms with substantially reduced
ROM or functional impairment.
Benefits
Diagnostic confirmation and the opportunity for definitive treatment.
Harms
Infections, operative complications.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Arthroscopy would rarely be repeated other than for new indications.
Rationale
There are quality studies including arthroscopy; however the literature usually utilizes
arthroscopy as the gold standard for comparison. Arthroscopy is performed nearly
universally in a context of a pre-operative diagnosis, such as rotator cuff tendinopathy, that
is thought to be a treatable abnormality, rather than merely for diagnostic purposes (Dinnes
et al., 2003, Fouse et al., 2007, Abrams, 2006, Baker et al., 2003, Ahmad et al., 2004,
Boszotta et al., 2004). If a specific diagnosis such as rotator cuff tendinitis is not suggested
by and supported by the evaluation with history, physical examination, and imaging studies,
then surgical intervention is much less likely to be successful and caution should be taken in
doing a purely diagnostic arthroscopy. Arthroscopy has been shown to be superior to MRI
especially subscapularis tears (Ward et al., 2018), and ultrasound for diagnosing partial
thickness rotator cuff tears and infraspinatus and subscapularis tears (Singisetti et al., 2011,
Teefey et al., 2000, Ward et al., 2018, Ostor et al., 2013). Arthroscopy has been used to
evaluate glenohumeral arthrosis (Guyette et al., 2002) (see below). Some caution is
indicated because intrasubstance tears are not well visualized arthroscopically. There are no
quality studies of arthroscopy for diagnostic purposes due to many methodological

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

61

weaknesses in the available literature (Dinnes et al., 2003). It appears helpful for diagnosis
and subsequent operative approaches (Baumann et al., 2008, Bishop et al., 2003).
Diagnostic arthroscopy is invasive, has adverse effects and is high cost. However, in select
patients there may be no other option for addressing the condition if a patient is not
responding to conservative care. Additionally, it is highly useful for operative planning and
to help determine whether arthroscopic repair is an appropriate approach for a rotator cuff
tear repair or instability surgery. Thus, arthroscopy is recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Shoulder
Arthroscopy; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries,
shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus
tendinitis; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative
predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 173
articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using
Best Match tab to find and review 213 articles, 780 in Scopus, 55 in CINAHL, 90 in Cochrane
Library, 304 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 3 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 2 from other sources. Of the 5 articles considered for inclusion, 5 diagnostic
studies and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

BONE SCANS
Bone scans involve intravenous administration of Technetium Tc-99m that is preferentially
concentrated in areas of boney metabolic activity. There are many causes for abnormal
radioactive uptake; thus, positive bone scans are not highly specific. Bone scans have been
used for diagnosis of early osteonecrosis of the humeral head prior to findings on x-ray,
among other uses.
BONE SCANNING FOR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Bone scanning is not recommended for evaluation of typical rotator cuff tendinopathies.
There are other uses for bone scans, particularly osteonecrosis, and other conditions with
increased bone metabolism.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

62

Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Rationale
Bone scanning may be a helpful diagnostic test to evaluate suspected metastases (multiple
sites), infected bone (osteomyelitis), inflammatory arthropathies, and trauma (e.g., occult
fractures), particularly if MRI is not available or is contra-indicated. It may be helpful in
those with suspected, early osteonecrosis (avascular necrosis) without x-ray changes. In
cases where the diagnosis is felt to be secure, there is no indication for bone scanning as it
does not alter the treatment or management. There is no clear indication for bone scanning
for typical rotator cuff tendinopathies. Bone scanning is minimally invasive, has minimal
potential for adverse effects (essentially equivalent to a blood test), but is high cost.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Bone scans,
Skeletal Scintigraphy; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and
reviewed 60 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 202 articles, 532 in Scopus, 8 in CINAHL, 8
in Cochrane Library, 1230 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (CT)
Computerized tomography remains an important imaging procedure, particularly for bony
anatomy, whereas MRI is superior for soft tissue abnormalities. However, most patients
have issues with soft tissue rather than bony abnormalities in the shoulder; thus on a
population-basis, far fewer CT scans are ordered. CT may nevertheless be useful for
shoulder joint abnormalities where advanced imaging of the bones is required (i.e., complex
proximal humerus fracture, scapular fracture). CT also may be useful to evaluate the
anatomy in patients with contraindications for MRI (most typically an implanted metallicferrous device). CT arthrogram is often preferred when evaluating posterior or anterior
glenohumeral instability when the bony anatomy needs to be better defined – glenoid
deficiency and humeral Hill-Sachs – as MRI is inferior for bone imaging. CT arthrogram can
be used in place of MRI to evaluate for rotator cuff tear (629).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

63

CT FOR EVALUATION OF ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Computerized tomography is not recommended for the evaluation of rotator cuff
tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
MRI is considered superior to computerized tomography for imaging most shoulder
abnormalities where advanced imaging of soft tissues is usually the primary concern. This is
especially so with rotator cuff tendinopathies. However, where imaging calcified structures
is required, CT is considered superior. This includes complex proximal humeral and
glenoid/scapular fractures. CT arthrogram can be used in place of MRI to evaluate for
rotator cuff tear, especially if there is a contraindication to MRI. A contrast CT study is
minimally invasive, has few, if any, adverse effects but is costly. It is not recommended for
evaluation of rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Computerized
Tomography; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and
reviewed 9680 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 12504 articles, 2845 in Scopus, 43 in
CINAHL, 284 in Cochrane Library, 446 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ELECTROMYOGRAPHY
See the Cervical and Thoracic Spine Disorders and Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders for
discussions regarding use of electrodiagnostic studies for evaluation of cervical spine and
distal upper extremity-related disorders that may present as shoulder pain.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

64

Electrodiagnostic studies have also been used to confirm diagnostic impressions of other
peripheral nerve entrapments, brachial plexopathies, and neurologic component of thoracic
outlet syndrome (630) (631).

FUNCTIONAL CAPACITY EVALUATIONS
Functional capacity evaluations (FCEs) consist of a comprehensive battery of performancebased tests to attempt to determine an individual’s ability for work and activities of daily
living (632-655). The goals of FCEs include:
●
Determining an individual’s readiness to work after injury or illness at Maximum
Medical Improvement (MMI),
●
Assisting with goal-setting and treatment planning for rehabilitation or to monitor
the progress of a patient in a rehabilitation program,
●
Estimating the potential vocational status and providing a foundation for effective
vocational rehabilitation,
●
Providing information to assist in disability determinations,
●
Providing information for hiring decisions (post-offer or fit-for-duty testing),
●
Providing information for developing work restrictions
●
Assessing the extent of disability in litigation cases, and
●
Providing information regarding a patient’s level of effort and consistency of
performance.
FUNCTIONAL CAPACITY EVALUATIONS FOR CHRONIC DISABLING SHOULDER PAIN
Recommended
Functional capacity evaluations (FCEs) are recommended as an option for evaluation of
disabling chronic shoulder pain where the information may be helpful to attempt to
objectify worker capability, function, motivation, and effort vis-à-vis either a specific job or
general job requirements. There are circumstances where a patient is not progressing as
anticipated at 6 to 8 weeks and an FCE may help evaluate functional status and patient
performance in order to match performance to specific job demands, particularly in
instances where those demands are medium to heavy. If a clinician is comfortable
describing work ability without an FCE, there is no requirement to do this testing.
Recordings or observation for signs of mismatch between effort and self-reported abilities
may be particularly helpful.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Patients with moderate to severe chronic shoulder pain that has ongoing functional
impairments and need to attempt to identify and quantify limitations. There are
circumstances where a patient is not progressing as anticipated at 6 to 8 weeks and an FCE
can evaluate functional status and patient performance in order to match performance to
specific job demands, particularly in instances where those demands are medium to heavy.
More typically, FCEs are useful after a healing plateau is established whether surgery was
performed or not. If a clinician is comfortable describing work ability without an FCE, there
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

65

is no requirement to do this testing. Recordings or observation for signs of mismatch
between effort and self-reported abilities may be particularly helpful.
Benefits
Identification and enumeration of limitations. Assess functional abilities and may facilitate
greater confidence in return to work.
Harms
Inappropriately low estimates of abilities, self-limitation of efforts, excessive disability,
inappropriately precluding the performance of tasks and activities the person could safely
perform. Medicalization, worsening of shoulder pain with testing; may have misleading
results that understate capabilities.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally, only one test is needed. A repeat FCE may be needed if there are substantial
changes in the person’s condition or status, or if there is a need to assess projected
performance against a different set of job criteria.
Rationale
There are no quality studies of FCEs to evaluate ability to perform work and/or work
limitations. Yet, FCEs are one of the few means to attempt to objectify limitations and are
frequently used in workers’ compensation systems, particularly as the correlation between
clinical pain ratings and functional abilities appears weak (Brouwer et al., 2005, Gross et al.,
2003, Reneman et al., 2002, Reneman et al., 2007, Schiphorst Preuper et al., 2008, Smeets
et al., 2007, Eriksen et al., 2006). However, obtaining objective data regarding shoulder
problems is somewhat more challenging than for distal upper extremity-related
impairments due to the degree of reliance on the patient’s subjective willingness to exert or
sustain major activities that are critical for job performance. Because their reliability and
validity have not been proven, FCEs should be utilized to evaluate work ability about what a
patient was willing to do on a given day. They should be carefully performed and
interpreted, but FCEs should not be used to override the judgment about the work ability of
a patient with a shoulder problem.
Many commercial FCE models are available. There is research regarding inter-and intra-rater
reliability for some of the models (complete discussion is beyond the scope of this
guideline). The validity of FCEs, particularly predictive validity, is more difficult to determine,
since factors other than physical performance may affect return to work (Pransky et al.,
2004, Gouttebarge et al., 2004). An FCE may be done for one or more reasons, including
identifying an individual’s ability to perform specific job tasks associated with a job (jobspecific FCE) and physical activities associated with any job (general FCE), or to assist in the
objectification of the degree(s) of impairment(s). The type of FCE needed, and any other
issues the FCE evaluator needs to address, should be specified when requesting an FCE.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

66

The term “capacity” used in FCE may be misleading, since an FCE generally measures an
individual’s voluntary performance rather than his or her capacity. Physical performance is
affected by psychosocial as well as physical factors. The extent of an individual’s
performance should be evaluated as part of the FCE process through analysis of his or her
level of physical effort (based on physiological and biomechanical changes during activity)
and consistency of performance. Perhaps more importantly, the objective findings identified
in the musculoskeletal evaluation should correlate with any identified functional deficits.
The individual’s performance level, especially as it relates to stated levels of performance,
should be discussed in the FCE report. A properly performed and well-reported FCE will
highlight such discrepancies. This is particularly important in shoulder evaluations where
there may be greater degrees of impairments at stake and where there are somewhat fewer
metrics available than for the distal upper extremity.
FCE test components may vary depending on the model used, but most contain the
following:
●
Patient interview including: informed consent, injury/illness and medical history,
current symptoms, activities and stated limitations, pain ratings/disability questionnaires
●
Musculoskeletal examination (e.g., including analogues of Waddell’s non-organic
signs for the shoulder such as non-anatomic pain)
●
Observations throughout the session (e.g., demonstrated sitting tolerance, pain
modifying behaviors)
●
Material handling tests (lifting, carrying, pushing, pulling)
●
Movement tests (walking, crouching, kneeling, reaching, etc.)
●
Positional tolerance tests
●
Dexterity/hand function
●
Static strength (varies among models)
●
Aerobic fitness (usually submaximal test-also variable among models)
●
Job-specific activities as relevant
●
Reliability of client reporting (e.g., non-organic signs, pain questionnaires, placebo
tests, etc.)
●
Physical effort testing (e.g., Jamar Dynamometer maximum voluntary effort, bell
curve analysis, rapid exchange grip, competitive test performance, heart rate, observation
of clinical inconsistencies, etc.)
FCE test length may vary between FCE models, although most 1-day FCEs are completed in 3
to 4 hours. Two-day tests, where the patient is seen on 2 consecutive days, may be
recommended when there are problems with fatigue (e.g., chronic fatigue syndrome),
delayed onset of symptoms, unusually complex job demands to simulate, and questions
about symptom validity. Test length for 2-day tests is generally 3 to 4 hours on the first day,
and 2 to 3 hours on the second day.
Interpretation of FCE results is complicated in that it is a measure of voluntary performance.
Before beginning testing, the patient is counseled to avoid doing anything to knowingly
reinjure him or herself. Thus, “fear avoidance” may cause testing to seriously underestimate
actual ability and result in a report that the patient had “self-limited performance due to

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

67

pain,” suggesting a low pain tolerance, when in reality the patient was doing what he or she
was instructed.
By analogy, the best studies on the ability of FCEs to predict safe re-entry to the workplace
following rehabilitation of work-related back pain/injury suggest that FCEs are not able to
predict safe return to work (concurrent validity) (Gross et al., 2005, Gross et al., 2004, Gross
et al., 2004). In a prospective cohort study of 1,438 consecutive work-related back patients,
all underwent an FCE prior to return to work. In the control group, the FCE was used to
write return-to-work guidelines, while in the study group it was ignored and the worker was
returned usually to full duty. Ignoring the FCE improved outcome (Hall et al., 1994).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Functional
Capacity Evaluations; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and
reviewed 6 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 34 articles, 42 in Scopus, 8,289 in CINAHL,
11 in Cochrane Library, 334 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered
for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0
from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (MRI)
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is often used as a secondary test after x-ray for rotator
cuff tendinopathies and many other shoulder joint problems since it tends to be helpful for
imaging soft tissues, particularly the rotator cuff (656-704).
MRI FOR DIAGNOSING ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
MRI is strongly recommended for patients suspected of having acute, clinically significant
rotator cuff tears. It is also recommended for select patients with subacute or chronic
shoulder pain thought to potentially have a symptomatic rotator cuff tear.
Strength of evidence Strongly Recommended, Evidence (A)
Level of confidence High

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

68

Indications
Patients thought to have an acute, clinically significant rotator cuff tear or subacute or
chronic shoulder pain suspected of having a clinically meaningful rotator cuff tear. MRI may
also be helpful with chronic rotator cuff tendinopathies, and impingement syndrome. If
there is significant rotator cuff weakness, immediate imaging may be indicated. Exceptions
include elderly patients, those who would not undergo surgical repair, or those who have
substantial signs of pre-existing large/massive rotator cuff tear. It is also reasonable to wait
for 1 or 2 weeks to ascertain whether the condition is likely to resolve with conservative
care without obtaining an MRI. Most acute tears without significant weakness should wait
2+ weeks prior to imaging as some patients with acute pain and limited ROM resolve
clinically. Those with subacute or chronic pain should generally have failed additional nonoperative treatment including NSAID, exercise, and injection(s).
Benefits
Secure a diagnosis.
Harms
False positives and false negatives for rotator cuff tears.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
There is strong evidence, with many high-quality studies having compared ultrasound (US)
to MRI. Although a few have reported comparable detection of full-thickness tears (Iannotti
et al., 2005), studies have consistently reported superiority of MRI to US for the detection of
partial-thickness tears (Ardic et al., 2006). One moderate-quality study compared MRI with
arthrography, suggesting MRI is superior to arthrography (Blanchard et al., 1999); however,
arthrography alone has been largely replaced by other procedures. MRI has also been
compared with arthroscopy in 57 patients with shoulder pain of unclear cause (Torstensen
et al., 1999). MRI was found to be accurate in detecting 68% of rotator cuff (RC) tears and
62% accurate in detecting labral injuries. MRI sensitivity for RC tears was 96% and specificity
49% (for labral tears, 73% sensitive, 58% specific). MRI was compared with arthroscopic
findings among 16 patients with trauma (Kirkley et al., 2003). The authors found moderate
correlation for superior labral lesions (k = 0. 60), fair agreement for rotator cuff tear (k = 0.
355), Hill-Sachs (k = 1. 0), and moderate for size (k = 0. 44). A consecutive case series of 104
patients with shoulder problems were evaluated and randomized to MRI first versus
arthrography first. There were modestly fewer changes in diagnostic categories with MRI
(30%) than arthrography (37%), p >0. 5. MRI led to slightly more changes in planned therapy
(36% vs. 25%, p >0. 3). MRI was found to be 79% accurate, 81% sensitive and 78% specific

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

69

for full-thickness rotator cuff tears. Arthrography was found to be 82% accurate, 50%
sensitive and 96% specific (Blanchard et al., 1999). A cross-sectional comparison of MRI (1.
5T loop-gap resonator surface coil), double contrast arthrography, high resolution
sonography and surgery among 38 patients with suspected rotator cuff tears did not include
all patients receiving all tests or surgery (other than MRI and arthrography) and reported a
sensitivity of MRI of 100% (Burk et al., 1989). Ultrasound detected 9/15 (60%) of tears.
However, the study population was small and biased in favor of overestimating the tests’
sensitivity.
MRI has shown increased changes in the rotator cuff and tears with increased age (Needell
et al., 1996, Sher et al., 1995), as well as a high prevalence of bony and peritendinous
shoulder abnormalities among those without symptoms (Needell et al., 1996). MRI has
reasonably good operant characteristics for full-thickness tears, although it does not have
good sensitivity for partial thickness tears (Dinnes et al., 2003). Fatty infiltration of the
rotator cuff tendons is also found on MRI and thought to signify chronicity as well as
portending a poorer surgical outcome (Berhouet et al., 2009). A comparative assessment of
T-2 weighted fast spin-echo technique with vs. without fat-suppression MRI for assessment
of rotator cuff tears among 177 patients thought to have tears found no differences in
assessments of complete tears, but differed in interpretations of partial tears (Singson et al.,
1996). Compared with surgery, sensitivity was 100% for full-thickness tears and specificity
for intact tendons was 86%. Fat suppression was felt helpful for partial tears. MRI
demonstrates acromial abnormalities and there is a higher prevalence of Type 3 acromion
processes among those with either rotator cuff tear or impingement syndrome (Epstein et
al., 1993). It has been suggested increased T2 signal in the distal clavicle may be an
indication for surgical resection.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is often used as a secondary test after x-ray for many
shoulder joint problems since it tends to be helpful for imaging soft tissues, particularly the
rotator cuff (Mulyadi et al., 2009, Chang et al., 2006, Ardic et al., 2006, Tuite et al., 2000,
Connell et al., 1999, McFarland et al., 2009, Pandya et al., 2008, Cartland et al., 1992, Chang
et al., 2008, Tirman et al., 1994, Wnorowski et al., 1997, Tung et al., 2000, Reuss et al.,
2006). Although studies are not heterogeneous, pooled estimates of the sensitivity for fullthickness tears has been calculated and is 89% with specificity 93%, while for partial
thickness tears, these estimates are only 44% sensitivity and 90% specificity (Dinnes et al.,
2003). Similarly, accuracy is lower for smaller than larger tears. There are concerns that MRI
is inferior to MR arthrography for evaluating the labrum (Schmerl et al., 2005); thus, MRA is
recommended for evaluation of the joint.
MRI is not invasive, has potential adverse effects from issues of claustrophobia or
complications of medication, and is costly. MRI is not recommended for routine shoulder
imaging, but it is recommended for evaluation of rotator cuff tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Magnetic
resonance Imaging; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

70

injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and
reviewed 1860 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 2297 articles, 7290 in Scopus, 231 in
CINAHL, 47 in Cochrane Library, 937 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 18 from PubMed, 6 from Scopus, 4 from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane
Library, 2 from Google Scholar, and 9 from other sources. Of the 40 articles considered for
inclusion, 12 diagnostic studies and 7 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE ARTHROGRAM (MRA)
Magnetic resonance (MR) arthrography combines and MRI with an arthrogram to overcome
MRI limitations and is usually performed in preference to CT arthrography unless bony
structure definition is needed as well (705,706). MR arthrography is particularly thought to be
effective for imaging labral pathology (148,385,707,712). Magnetic resonance arthrogram has
been used to diagnose rotator cuff tendinopathies (713,714).
MR ARTHROGRAM (MRA) FOR SELECT DIAGNOSIS OF ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
MR arthrography is recommended for diagnosing articular side partial-thickness rotator cuff
tears, subscapularis tears, and labral tears in select patients with subacute or chronic
shoulder pain.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Patients with subacute or chronic shoulder pain with symptoms or clinical suspicion of
rotator cuff tendinopathies or tears, impingement, and subacromial bursitis or other
concerns about the shoulder joint requiring MR imaging. MR arthrograms are generally not
necessary for uncomplicated rotator cuff tendinopathies; however, they are indicated if
there are concerns regarding concomitant labral tears. Those with subacute or chronic pain
should generally have failed additional non-operative treatment including NSAID, exercise
and injection(s).
Benefits

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

71

Secure a diagnosis.
Harms
False positives and false negatives; however, arthrography improves the accuracy, especially
regarding complete rotator cuff tears and significant labral tears. Small risk of infection and
complications from the injection.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
MR arthrograms have not been evaluated in large-scale quality studies to assess their utility
for the diagnosis of rotator cuff tendinopathies. Although studies are heterogeneous,
pooled estimates of the sensitivity for full-thickness tears have been estimated to be 95%
with a specificity of 93% (Dinnes et al., 2003). There is high prevalence for labral injury with
a first shoulder dislocation based on MR arthrography (MRA) (Antonio et al., 2007). One
study suggested that stand-alone MRA is not sufficient for diagnosing calcific tendinitis
(Zubler et al., 2007). Arthrography with low-field MR was found to be equivalent to highfield in a series of 38 patients (Loew et al., 2000). A comparison of high- versus low-field MR
imaging for SLAP tears among symptomatic patients found high field superior for diagnosing
SLAP (Tung et al., 2000). The sensitivity of high-field MRA was 90% and specificity 63%, while
sensitivity for low field was 64% and 70% specificity. MRA was found superior to CT
arthrography (CTA) and marginally better than MRI for identification of labral tears in a case
series of patients with recurrent anterior instability, prior anterior dislocation or shoulder
pain of unknown cause (Chandnani et al., 1993). MRA sensitivity for a labral tear was 96. 4%,
MRI was 92. 9%, and CTA was 73. 1%. Specificity was 100% for all three tests; however, this
appears overstated as there were only two patients without a tear in this small case series.

MR arthrography is invasive; has adverse effects including a low, but definite, risk of
infection; and is painful. It is also costly, although MRA has been felt to provide better costeffectiveness than MRI or CT arthrography for select diagnoses (Oh et al., 1999). It is likely
the best imaging procedure available for patients thought to have labral tears or patients
with good strength in order to assess the labrum and rotator cuff with traumatic injury
simultaneously and is recommended for select use.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: magnetic
resonance arthrogram, MRA; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain,
rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial
bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

72

predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We
found and reviewed 202 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary
search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 250 articles, 129 in Scopus, 9 in
CINAHL, 19 in Cochrane Library, 590 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 2 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 3 articles considered for
inclusion, 3 diagnostic studies and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ULTRASOUND
Diagnostic ultrasound has been used for evaluating rotator cuff tears (207,694,715,721).
ULTRASOUND FOR DIAGNOSING ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Sometimes Recommended
Ultrasound is recommended for selective use on patients suspected of having full-thickness
rotator cuff tears.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Ultrasound operators should have sufficient skill to obviate the need for MRI or CT scanning
(Boykin et al., 2010, Hanchard et al., 2013); otherwise, the test introduces unnecessary
redundancy. Patients with symptoms and signs of a clinically significant acute, full-thickness
rotator cuff tear or subacute or chronic shoulder pain suspected of having a symptomatic
rotator cuff tear (Ardic et al., 2006, Wall et al., 2012, Ianotti, 2005, Naredo et al., 1999).
Patients thought to only have a partial-thickness tear are generally not good candidates for
US as MRI is shown to be superior (Ardic et al., 2006, Wall et al., 2012, Roberts et al., 2001,
Sipola et al., 2010, Naredo et al., 1999). Most clinical presentations should wait
approximately 2 weeks prior to imaging because some patients with acute pain and limited
range of motion resolve clinically; obvious tears are an exception to waiting 2 weeks. Those
with subacute or chronic pain should generally have failed additional non-operative
treatment including NSAIDs, exercise, and injection(s) (Moosikasuwan et al., 2005,
Ottenheijm et al., 2010). An MR arthrogram is recommended for suspected labral injury (see
below) (Ardic et al., 2006).
Benefits

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

73

Secure a diagnosis.
Harms
False positives and false negatives.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Repeat ultrasound should be based on significant change in symptoms and/or examination
findings.
Rationale
Many high-quality studies have compared US to MRI. Although a few have reported
comparable detection of full-thickness tears (Frei et al., 2008, Ianotti, 2005), studies
consistently report superiority of MRI to US for the detection of partial thickness tears (Ardic
et al., 2006, Wall et al., 2012, Roberts et al., 2001, Sipola et al., 2010, Naredo et al., 1999);
thus, US is generally not indicated for use in patients thought to have a partial-thickness
tear.
Ultrasound has been compared with physical examination findings, suggesting physical
exam identified fewer abnormalities compared with ultrasound, although there was not
clinical correlation with treatment outcomes (Kim et al., 2007). Ultrasound utilized to
evaluate asymptomatic shoulders found increased prevalence of full-thickness tears with
increased age (Sher et al., 1995, Tempelhof et al., 1999); with approximately 6% among 212
individuals (Schibany et al., 2004) and in 7. 6% of 420 (Moosmayer et al., 2009).
Asymptomatic tears increase in prevalence by age – 50 to 59 years (2. 1%) versus 60 to 69
years (5. 7%) versus 70 to 79 years (15%) (Moosmayer et al., 2009). Ultrasound is thought to
be relatively effective for identifying full-thickness tears (Iannotti et al., 2005, Ottenheijm et
al., 2010, Hedtmann et al., 1995, Zehetgruber et al., 2002, Brenneke et al., 1992,
Furtschegger et al., 1988, Mack et al., 1988, Mack et al., 1988, Middleton et al., 1986, Smith
et al., 2011, Awerbuch, 2008); however, it appears somewhat less effective for identifying
partial-thickness tears (Naredo et al., 1999, Brenneke et al., 1992, Awerbuch, 2008,
Buchbinder et al., 2013). A surgical case series of 42 patients attempted to determine the
diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound. Ultrasound detected all full-thickness tears (100%
sensitive, 97% specific), but only 6 of 13 of the partial-thickness tears (46% sensitive, 97%
specific). One full-thickness tear was falsely diagnosed. Another study has suggested
sensitivity for detection of tear size of 83 to 86% (Ianotti, 2005). Ultrasound has advantages
of being able to move the arm actively or passively during the examination; it is less
expensive; and it may be available in most centers (Boykin et al., 2010). When conservative
treatment failed, skilled physician’s using ultrasound reportedly had high diagnostic
accuracy identifying tendinopathy, calcifying tendonitis, and partial- and full- thickness tears
(Ottenheijm et al., 2010). SLAP lesions cannot be well visualized using ultrasound (Hanchard
et al., 2013). Impingement was felt to have been diagnosed in 27 of 34 cases (79% sensitive,
96% positive predictive value) (Read et al., 1998). A small study of ultrasound the day before
surgery for shoulder arthritis in 20 patients suggested that ultrasound was accurate for
evaluating hypertrophy of the bursa (93% sensitive, 83% specific), biceps tendon rupture

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

74

(70% sensitive, 100% specific), and rotator cuff tear (83% sensitive, 57% specific) (Alasaarela
et al., 1998). Ultrasound-guided MR arthrography was evaluated in an RCT with anterior
versus posterior approaches and found equal ratings of discomfort (Koivikko et al., 2008).
Ultrasound is not invasive, is of low to moderate cost, and has little risk of adverse effects.
However, high-quality evidence has consistently documented that US is less effective for the
detection of partial-thickness tears (Ardic et al., 2006, Wall et al., 2012, Roberts et al., 2001,
Sipola et al., 2010, Naredo et al., 1999). Thus, the indications for US are largely limited to the
identification of full-thickness tears by skilled operators. The main disadvantage is the high
dependency on the physician’s/technician’s skills (Boykin et al., 2010, Hanchard et al., 2013).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: ultrasound,
sonography, sonographic; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator
cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and
reviewed 9675 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 12498 articles, 4297 in Scopus, 277 in
CINAHL, 298 in Cochrane Library, 1260 260 in Google Scholar, and 24 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from
Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 24 from other sources. Of the 27 articles
considered for inclusion, 26 diagnostic studies and 1 systematic review met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SINGLE PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT)
Single-proton emission computed tomography (SPECT) is a 3-dimensional imaging technique
that can be used to help diagnose rotator cuff tendinopathies (722,724).
SPECT FOR SHOULDER DISORDERS
Not Recommended
SPECT is not recommended for the evaluation of patients with shoulder disorders, including
rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

75

Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that SPECT is helpful in
improving care of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain compared with MRI, MRA or US.
There are no quality studies that PET adds diagnostic benefits for rotator cuff
tendinopathies above that achieved by MRI, MRA, US and/or arthroscopy, which are
effective to highly effective, and thus SPECT is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Single Photon
Emission Computed Tomography, Tomography, Emission-Computed, Single-Photon,
Positron Emission Tomography, PET scan; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear,
shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis,
subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity,
positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy,
efficiency. We found and reviewed 27 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did
a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 30 articles, 456 in
Scopus, 9 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 58 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from
Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 6 articles
considered for inclusion, 1 diagnostic study and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET)
Positron emission tomography (PET) is a method that can be used to identify issues with the
rotator cuff tears in the shoulder (725,727).
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY FOR DIAGNOSING ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
PET is not recommended for evaluation of rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

76

There are no quality studies that PET adds diagnostic benefits for rotator cuff
tendinopathies above that achieved by MRI, MRA, US and/or arthroscopy, which are
effective to highly effective, and thus PET is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Positron Emission
Tomography, PET scan; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator
cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and
reviewed 23 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 26 articles, 399 in Scopus, 8 in CINAHL, 0 in
Cochrane Library, 25 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 1 from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 3 articles considered for inclusion, 2
diagnostic studies and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ARTHROGRAPHY
Arthrography involves the injection of contrast into the joint. It was modified in the 1970s to
include injection of air (“double contrast”) (614). Arthrography under fluoroscopy in isolation
has now been almost entirely replaced by other procedures, including MRI and MRA,
primarily due to its low sensitivity for full-thickness tears and essentially no sensitivity for
partial thickness tears (728). Most arthrograms including MR arthrogram and CT arthrogram
are performed using fluoroscopy to localize the joint and inject the contrast agent.

DIAGNOSTIC INJECTIONS
Diagnostic injections particularly of the subacromial space, glenohumeral joint and
acromioclavicular joint are sometimes performed. However, they are nearly always
performed in combination with a therapeutic intervention, such as a glucocorticosteroid
injection. Injection with a therapeutic agent is nearly always preferable due to less overall
invasiveness with 1 injection rather than 2, as well as the potential to assess the patient

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

77

both immediately post-injection for diagnostic purposes as well as longer term for
therapeutic purposes (see Injections).

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
INITIAL CARE
Initial care of rotator cuff tendinopathies nearly always involves non-operative treatment
during which time it often becomes clearer whether a tear is present, and if so, how
significant it is. Still, there should be early consideration as to whether there is a fullthickness complete rotator cuff tear > 1cm in younger patients, which then should result in
earlier consideration of surgery as the outcomes in those patients are believed to be better
with surgery (see Surgical Considerations).
It is recommended to educate the patient regarding the generally good long-term prognosis,
as well as the need to continue use and ROM exercises to prevent potential adhesive
capsulitis. For patients with significant pain, over-the-counter (OTC) analgesics (NSAIDs,
acetaminophen) and self-applications of heat and ice are recommended. Slings and
immobilizers are not recommended, and if used, should be used with daily range of motion
exercises and for only a brief course and weaned off use by 3-5 days.

ACTIVITY MODIFICATION AND EXERCISE
Exercises are among the most important therapeutic options for the treatment and
rehabilitation of rotator cuff tendinopathies. While there are many ways to categorize and
analyze exercise, this guideline evaluates exercise in three broad groupings:
1.
2.
3.

range-of-motion exercise,
strengthening, and
aerobic exercise.

Exercise programs typically include combinations of exercises and are prescribed as selfdirected, structured appointments with physical and/or occupational therapists, or often
both. Subsequent sections include reviews of spa therapy and balneotherapy.

EXERCISE PRESCRIPTIONS FOR SHOULDER PAIN
Recommended
An exercise prescription is moderately recommended for treatment of acute, subacute,
chronic, post-operative shoulder pain. This prescription may either be for self-directed
exercises (home program), formal in-clinic, or both.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence High
Indications
All patients with shoulder pain, including that due to rotator cuff tendinopathies appear to
benefit from an exercise prescription.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

78

Benefits
Improvement in shoulder pain, improved cardiovascular fitness.
Harms
None reported in quality studies. Theoretical risk of myocardial infarction, angina and
musculoskeletal injury in a severely deconditioned patient.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
If a supervised program is felt to be needed, recommended frequency is 1 to 3 sessions a
week for up to 4 weeks as long as objective functional improvement and symptom
reduction is occurring. Results of the exercise prescription should be regularly monitored
and failure to progressively improve is an indication to either revisit the differential
diagnosis and/or seek a second opinion/consultation, particularly by the time approximately
6-12 therapy appointments is reached.
If self-directed, daily exercise is recommended. An exercise prescription should address
specific treatment goals and be time limited with transition to an independent exercise
program (no longer considered treatment). The purpose of supervised exercise therapy is
symptom reduction, functional improvement, and educating the patient so that he or she
can independently manage the program. Evaluation for an exercise prescription involves
consideration of four critical components:
●
Stage of (theoretical) tissue healing (acute, subacute, chronic),
●
Severity of symptoms (mild, moderate, severe),
●
Degree and type of deconditioning (flexibility, strength, aerobic, muscular
endurance), and
●
Psychosocial factors (e.g., medication dependence, fear-avoidance, secondary gain,
mood disorders).
Indications for discontinuation
Recovery, attainment of a functional recovery, complete independence to discharge from a
formal program, non-compliance.
Rationale
There are quality studies of the value of exercises; however, there are weaknesses in these
studies which limit the strength of the conclusions and the overall evidence base (see
specific types of exercise). One trial found a higher dose exercise program superior to a
lower dose exercise program, but was susceptible to a contact time bias (Østerås et al.,
2010). Another trial found an activity-oriented program was superior (Horst et al., 2017).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

79

Regarding general exercise approach for shoulder pain and rotator cuff tendinopathy,
range-of-motion and aerobic exercises are recommended. Strengthening exercises are
typically delayed to later in the acute recovery stage or for subacute or chronic shoulder
pain. Pain control modalities may be needed as a complement to exercise. The
recommended frequency is 1 to 3 sessions a week for up to 4 weeks as long as objective
functional improvement and symptom reduction are occurring.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: General Exercise;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 537 articles
in PubMed, 4019 in Scopus, 7114 in CINAHL, 42 in Cochrane Library, 2013 in Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 10 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0
from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of
the 12 articles considered for inclusion, 6 randomized trials and 4 systematic reviews met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
AEROBIC EXERCISES FOR TREATMENT OF ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Aerobic exercises are recommended for the treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
All patients with all stages of shoulder pain. However, those with significant cardiac disease
or significant potential for cardiovascular disease should be considered for evaluation prior
to instituting vigorous exercises, following the American College of Sports Medicine’s
Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription, 9th ed. (Pescatello, 2014) with regards to
health screening and risk stratification.
Benefits

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

80

Improved endurance and aerobic capacity. Potential for earlier improvement in range of
motion due to use of the arm/arm swing. Improved cardiovascular fitness, improved health
status.
Harms
Negligible. None reported in quality studies. Theoretical risk of myocardial infarction and
angina in a severely deconditioned patient. Intolerance of weight bearing in severe lower
extremity osteoarthrosis. Other musculoskeletal disorders possible (e.g., plantar heel pain).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
There are no quality studies to address intensity. Prior studies for chronic low back pain
patients that may be applicable to shoulder pain patients include walking at least 4 times a
week at 60% of predicted maximum heart rate (220-age = maximum heart rate) is
recommended (Chatzitheodorou D, 2007). Benchmarks were 20 minutes during Week 1, 30
minutes during Week 2, and 45 minutes after that point. Nearly all patients should be
encouraged to maintain aerobic exercises on a long-term basis additionally to maintain
optimal health.
For post-operative patients, a graded but more reduced walking program is generally
desired, often using distance or time as minimum benchmarks – e.g., start with 10 to 50 feet
depending largely on severity of the operative procedure. Gradually increasing distance and
duration of walking. A reasonable eventual target after the operative recovery period is
based on treatment of chronic shoulder pain analogized from low back pain patients as
noted above and is walking at least 4 times a week at 60% of predicted maximum heart rate
(Chatzitheodorou D, 2007).
Indications for discontinuation
Transition to a self-directed program is advised for those who have recovered, do not
require supervision and/or have been discharged from care. Discontinuation is rarely
indicated and may be due to intolerance (rarely occurs), development of other disorders.
Rationale
There are no quality studies addressing the singular utility of aerobic exercises for the
treatment of any stage of rotator cuff tendinopathies patients. One moderate-quality RCT
with subsequent publications assessed a mixture of types of exercise that included aerobic
exercise found a higher dose program to be superior to a lower dose program for
subacromial pain patients (Osteras, 2009, Østerås et al., 2008, Østerås et al., 2010).
Yet, many jobs have aerobic demands and thus debility can be harmful and delay return to
work. As well, progressive walking involves graded increased use of the shoulder and thus
may have some therapeutic value. Progressive aerobic exercises are thus recommended as
part of a treatment strategy (typically including range of motion exercises and then

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

81

strengthening exercises) for the treatment of for the treatment of patients with acute,
subacute, chronic and post-operative shoulder pain due to rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Aerobic Exercises;
cardiovascular exercises, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator
cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 650 articles in PubMed, 4,373 in Scopus, 8 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane
Library, 6 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from
PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 2 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Of the 3 articles considered for inclusion, 3 randomized trials and
0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
RANGE-OF-MOTION EXERCISE FOR TREATMENT OF ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Range-of-motion exercises are recommended for the treatment of rotator cuff
tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
All patients with shoulder pain, including that due to rotator cuff tendinopathies appear to
benefit from an exercise prescription that includes range-of-motion exercises.
Benefits
Improvement in shoulder pain, range of motion and function.
Harms
May have worsened pain while performing the exercises.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

82

Frequency/Dose/Duration
If a supervised program is felt to be needed, recommended frequency is 1 to 3 sessions a
week for up to 4 weeks as long as objective functional improvement and symptom
reduction is occurring. Results of the exercise prescription should be regularly monitored
and failure to progressively improve is an indication to either revisit the differential
diagnosis and/or seek a second opinion/consultation, particularly by the time approximately
6-12 therapy appointments is reached.
If self-directed, daily exercise is recommended. An exercise prescription should address
specific treatment goals and be time limited with transition to an independent exercise
program (no longer considered treatment). The purpose of supervised exercise therapy is
symptom reduction, functional improvement, and educating the patient so that he or she
can independently manage the program. Evaluation for an exercise prescription involves
consideration of four critical components:
●
Stage of (theoretical) tissue healing (acute, subacute, chronic),
●
Severity of symptoms (mild, moderate, severe),
●
Degree and type of deconditioning (flexibility, strength, aerobic, muscular
endurance), and
●
Psychosocial factors (e.g., medication dependence, fear-avoidance, secondary gain,
mood disorders).
Individualized, supervised programs are generally needed for post-operative care and the
length of those prescriptions is typically longer than for non-operative patients. Therapy
courses of up to 3 months in more severely affected patients are possible; nevertheless,
progressive functional gain should be documented to warrant further batches of
appointments. Individualization should be based on factors including age, pre-operative
condition, immediate surgical results, contraindications, and other medical conditions;
advancement of the program also must be individualized based on progress. Programs and
protocols should be closely coordinated with the treating orthopedist, particularly as
variability in patients is wide – although workers’ compensation patients tend to be
younger, in better condition, and able to advance conditioning exercises more rapidly than
the elderly. Duration is based primarily on progress. Highly motivated patients may require
only weekly sessions for advancement of home exercise program components and may
achieve comparable outcomes to a supervised program (Roddey et al., 2002, Andersen et
al., 1999). Others require more supervision, particularly if there is significant pain with use.
Indications for discontinuation
Recovery, attainment of a functional recovery, complete independence to discharge from a
formal program, non-compliance.
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

83

There are six moderate-quality trials involving rotator cuff tendinopathy patients. The
highest quality study followed patients for more than 2 years and compared a traditional
group (active-assisted ROM on day of surgery, dynamic exercises for rotator cuff after 6
weeks, and strengthening after 8 weeks) versus progressive group (active-assisted ROM and
dynamic RC exercises day of surgery, strengthening after 6 weeks) versus home exercise.
Many outcome measures favored the progressive exercise group. Two moderate-quality
trials suggested that weekly supervised appointments to advance a home-exercise program
was equivalent to a traditional rehabilitation program (Roddey et al., 2002, Andersen et al.,
1999).
There is one moderate-quality trial suggesting no benefits of continuous passive motion
(CPM) post-operatively; however, this study appears underpowered (Raab et al., 1996) and
thus there is no recommendation. Another moderate-quality trial suggested this CPM device
may have benefits among patients living alone, concerns about adhesions or adhesive
capsulitis, repeat rotator cuff repairs, and repair of massive tears (Lastayo et al., 1998).
There are other regimens utilized in quality surgical trials that demonstrate good surgical
outcomes, yet there are considerable differences among the reported post-operative
rehabilitation studies and trials. These include active-assisted ROM 5 times daily and
restoration of rotator cuff muscles and scapular stabilizers after full flexibility is
accomplished (Jackins, 2004); submaximal training begun 3 months after surgery (Rahme et
al., 1998); active-assisted ROM immediately after surgery; and eccentric and concentric,
isokinetic and manual strengthening at 6 to 12 weeks (Wilk et al., 1993). “No prospective
randomized studies have shown rehabilitation with graded exercises to be more effective
than other interventions after arthroscopic subacromial decompression. Neither has
different progression in workload intensity after this procedure" (Klintberg et al., 2008).
The highest quality surgical trial comparing detailed exercise with arthroscopic
decompression for impingement syndrome utilized a regimen of exercise, hot and cold
applications, and soft tissue treatments followed by active periscapular muscle training for
strengthening the rotator cuff. There were 19 total sessions until discharge to a homeexercise program (Haahr et al., 2005). A second trial was not well described (Brox et al.,
1993). Another trial included active and passive shoulder mobilization and stabilizing muscle
training (Rubenthaler et al., 2003). Exercise programs are not invasive, have low potential
for adverse effects, but generally involve at least moderate to high aggregate costs. They are
recommended, although individualization appears necessary and supervised home-exercise
programs may suffice for some patients.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Range of Motion
Exercises; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries,
shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus
tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

84

1,276 articles in PubMed, 5,368 in Scopus, 24,860 in CINAHL, 4 in Cochrane Library, 30 in
Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 4
from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 1 from
other sources. Of the 7 articles considered for inclusion, 5 randomized trials and 2
systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
STRENGTHENING EXERCISES FOR TREATMENT OF ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Strengthening exercises are recommended for the treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence High
Indications
All patients with shoulder pain, including that due to rotator cuff tendinopathies appear to
benefit from an exercise prescription that includes strengthening exercises.
Benefits
Improvement in shoulder pain, strength and function.
Harms
May have worsened pain while performing the exercises.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
If a supervised program is felt to be needed, recommended frequency is 1 to 3 sessions a
week for up to 4 weeks as long as objective functional improvement and symptom
reduction is occurring. Results of the exercise prescription should be regularly monitored
and failure to progressively improve is an indication to either revisit the differential
diagnosis and/or seek a second opinion/consultation, particularly by the time approximately
6-12 therapy appointments is reached.
If self-directed, daily exercise is recommended. An exercise prescription should address
specific treatment goals and be time limited with transition to an independent exercise
program (no longer considered treatment). The purpose of supervised exercise therapy is

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

85

symptom reduction, functional improvement, and educating the patient so that he or she
can independently manage the program. Evaluation for an exercise prescription involves
consideration of four critical components:
●
Stage of (theoretical) tissue healing (acute, subacute, chronic),
●
Severity of symptoms (mild, moderate, severe),
●
Degree and type of deconditioning (flexibility, strength, aerobic, muscular
endurance), and
●
Psychosocial factors (e.g., medication dependence, fear-avoidance, secondary gain,
mood disorders).
Indications for discontinuation
Recovery, attainment of a functional recovery, complete independence to discharge from a
formal program, non-compliance.
Rationale
There are multiple moderate-quality RCTs, although they include varying combinations of
exercises, and reported evidence of efficacy of strengthening exercises (Holmgren et al.,
2012, Maenhout et al., 2013, Mulligan et al., 2016, Turgut et al., 2017). An eccentric exercise
program was not found to be superior (Dejaco et al., 2017). One trial suggested minimal
differences between open-chain, closed-chain and minimally loaded range of motion
exercises (Heron et al., 2017).
Trials of therapy compared with arthroscopic repair for small- to medium-sized rotator cuff
tears have suggested surgery is superior as the tears tend to increase in size over time
(Moosmayer et al., 2009, Moosmayer et al., 2010, Kukkonen et al., 2015).
Strengthening exercises have quality evidence of efficacy and thought to be important for
the treatment and rehabilitation of acute, subacute, chronic and post-operative shoulder
conditions especially of the rotator cuff, and thus are recommended. Exercises are also an
option for those with small to medium-sized rotator cuff tears who opt for non-operative
treatment.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Strengthening
Exercises; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries,
shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus
tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed
50 articles in PubMed, 282 in Scopus, 46 in CINAHL, 6 in Cochrane Library, 336 in Google
Scholar, and 5 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 10 from PubMed, 3 from
Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 5 from other

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

86

sources. Of the 20 articles considered for inclusion, 12 randomized trials and 4 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

REHABILITATION PROGRAMS
Physical and occupational therapy are professional disciplines. Rehabilitation has been used
as part of a treatment plan for the treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies (556,729,731-736) in
the form of a home exercise program delivered in 1 visit or supervised in-clinic program
over multiple weeks/months.
PHYSICAL AND/OR OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Physical and occupational therapy are recommended for the treatment of rotator cuff
tendinopathies, particularly for institution and advancement of quality exercise programs.
See separate recommendations for each type of treatment and modality, including
exercises, which critically have varying degrees of efficacy and inefficacy.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Generally useful for all phases of treatment for rotator cuff tendinopathy, with the greatest
benefits being the need for institution of a quality exercise program, teaching home
exercises and graded advancement of the program.
Benefits
Earlier institution of an effective program and advancement of the program of exercise.
Harms
Negligible, unless ineffective treatments are provided, which may then medicalize and
prolong the case.
Frequency/Dose/Duration

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

87

If a supervised program is felt to be needed, recommended frequency is 1 to 3 sessions a
week for up to 4 weeks as long as objective functional improvement and symptom
reduction is occurring. Results of the exercise prescription should be regularly monitored
and failure to progressively improve is an indication to either revisit the differential
diagnosis and/or seek a second opinion/consultation, particularly by the time approximately
6-12 therapy appointments is reached. If self-directed, daily exercise is recommended (see
Exercise recommendations).
Indications for discontinuation
Functional recovery, independence in a home program, or non-compliance.
Rationale
There are quality studies of specific treatments commonly used by physical and/or
occupational therapists. Some of these have evidence of efficacy, and some have evidence
of a lack of efficacy. There is one trial suggesting no differences between a supervised and
an unsupervised program (Granviken et al., 2015). Please see individual treatment and/or
modality recommendations.
There are limited studies addressing early vs. late physical therapy, and mostly assessing
institution of early compared with late range of motion after arthroscopic repair of rotator
cuff tears (Gallagher, 2015, Kluczynski, 2016, Mazzocca et al., 2017). Those studies do not
show evidence of benefit of early range of motion. Regardless, studies of early vs. late
institution of therapy are challenging to interpret, especially as they are potentially
confounded by spectrum bias (earlier resolving cases would naturally be included in the
early but not late groups) and thus typically precluding an evidence-based recommendation
when there are studies which appear supportive.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Physical Therapy,
Physical Therapy Modalities; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain,
rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial
bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 1280 articles in PubMed, 1189 in Scopus, 389 in CINAHL, 426 in
Cochrane Library, 1180 in Google Scholar, and 4 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 1 from PubMed, 4 from Scopus, 4 from CINAHL, 2 from Cochrane Library, 2 from
Google Scholar, and 4 from other sources. Of the 17 articles considered for inclusion, 12
randomized trials and 5 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

88

review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Early Versus Late
Physical Therapy, Early Versus Delayed Physical Therapy; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator
cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific
tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled
trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation,
random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 9 articles in PubMed, 3,915 in
Scopus, 286 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 451 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 2 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 3 articles
considered for inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 2 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
EXERCISE OR REHABILITATION PROGRAMS FOR POST-OPERATIVE ROTATOR CUFF REPAIR
AND/OR SUBACROMIAL DECOMPRESSION
Recommended
A post-operative exercise or rehabilitation program is recommended for post-operative
rotator cuff repair.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence High
Indications
All post-operative rotator cuff tendinopathy patients are candidates.
Benefits
Improved and earlier return of function.
Harms

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

89

Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Programs need to be individualized (see below). Generally, begin with appointments 2 or 3
times weekly and gradually taper as home exercises are instituted and the patient’s
recovery advances. Courses of up to 3 months in more severe cases may be needed,
although most patients require 6 to 8 weeks of supervised programs. Patients should be
tracked and show ongoing objective improvements to add additional batches of 6-8
appointments.
Programs need to be individualized based on factors including age, pre-operative condition,
immediate surgical results, contraindications, and other medical conditions; advancement
of the program also must be individualized based on progress. Programs and protocols
should be closely coordinated with the treating orthopedist, particularly as variability in
patients is wide – although workers’ compensation patients tend to be younger, in better
condition, and able to advance conditioning exercises more rapidly than the elderly.
Duration is based primarily on progress. Highly motivated patients may require only weekly
sessions for advancement of home exercise program components and may achieve
comparable outcomes to a supervised program (Roddey et al., 2002, Andersen et al., 1999).
Others require more supervision, particularly if there is significant pain with use.
Indications for discontinuation
Recovery of function, achievement of goals, resolution of pain, patient satisfaction with
recovery, lack of ongoing incremental improvement, non-compliance.
Rationale
There are many moderate-quality trials involving patients with rotator cuff tendinopathy.
The highest quality study followed patients for more than 2 years and compared a
traditional group (active-assisted ROM on day of surgery, dynamic exercises for rotator cuff
after 6 weeks, and strengthening after 8 weeks) versus progressive group (active-assisted
ROM and dynamic RC exercises day of surgery, strengthening after 6 weeks) versus home
exercise. Many outcome measures favored the progressive exercise group. Two moderatequality trials suggested that weekly supervised appointments to advance a home-exercise
program was equivalent to a traditional rehabilitation program (Roddey et al., 2002,
Andersen et al., 1999).
There is one moderate-quality trial suggesting no benefits of continuous passive motion
(CPM) post-operatively; however, this study appears underpowered (Raab et al., 1996) and
thus there is no recommendation. Another moderate-quality trial suggested this CPM device
may have benefits among patients living alone, concerns about adhesions or adhesive
capsulitis, repeat rotator cuff repairs, and repair of massive tears (Lastayo et al., 1998).
There are other regimens utilized in quality surgical trials that demonstrate good surgical
outcomes, yet there are considerable differences among the reported post-operative

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

90

rehabilitation studies and trials. These include active-assisted ROM 5 times daily and
restoration of rotator cuff muscles and scapular stabilizers after full flexibility is
accomplished (Jackins, 2004); submaximal training begun 3 months after surgery (Rahme et
al., 1998); active-assisted ROM immediately after surgery; and eccentric and concentric,
isokinetic and manual strengthening at 6 to 12 weeks (Wilk et al., 1993). “No prospective
randomized studies have shown rehabilitation with graded exercises to be more effective
than other interventions after arthroscopic subacromial decompression. Neither has
different progression in workload intensity after this procedure” (Klintberg et al., 2008).
The highest quality surgical trial comparing detailed exercise with arthroscopic
decompression for impingement syndrome utilized a regimen of exercise, hot and cold
applications, and soft tissue treatments followed by active periscapular muscle training for
strengthening the rotator cuff. There were 19 total sessions until discharge to a homeexercise program (Haahr et al., 2005). A second trial was not well described (Brox et al.,
1993). Another trial included active and passive shoulder mobilization and stabilizing muscle
training (Rubenthaler et al., 2003). Exercise programs are not invasive, have low potential
for adverse effects, but generally involve at least moderate to high aggregate costs. They are
recommended, although individualization appears necessary and supervised home-exercise
programs may suffice for some patients.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Post-Operative
Exercise or Rehabilitation Program; exercise therapy, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff
tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis,
subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 231 articles in PubMed, 80 in Scopus, 29224 in
CINAHL, 56 in Cochrane Library, 239 in Google Scholar, and 12 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 5 from PubMed, 4 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 4 from Cochrane
Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 12 from other sources. Of the 25 articles considered for
inclusion, 17 randomized trials and 8 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MIRROR THERAPY FOR SHOULDER PAIN AND ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

91

There is no recommendation for mirror therapy for shoulder pain and rotator cuff
tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials of mirror therapy for rotator cuff tendinopathies and shoulder
pain. A case series has suggested potential efficacy for patients with shoulder pain with
reduced range of motion (Louw et al., 2017). There also is evidence of efficacy for strokes
and CRPS, and it has been used for adhesive capsulitis. However, in the absence of
supportive evidence, there is no recommendation for rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Mirror Therapy;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 3 articles in
PubMed, 938 in Scopus, 4 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane Library, 413 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ALLIED HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
BALNEOTHERAPY
Balneotherapy has been used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies (737-743).
BALNEOTHERAPY FOR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Balneotherapy is not recommended for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

92

Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no high-quality, sham-controlled studies of balneotherapy for treatment of
rotator cuff tendinopathies. Two RCTs compared balneotherapy added to multiple
physiotherapy treatments resulting in likely contact time biases and an inability to readily
determine benefits of balneotherapy (Tefner et al., 2015, Koç et al., 2021). Another RCT
compared with usual care in France and components of care are unclear; as patients had
chronic pain, whether the patients already had the usual care is not clear, and is a
potentially fatal study flaw (i.e., more of the same bias) (Chary-Valckenaere et al., 2018).
Balneotherapy or spa therapy is not invasive, has low adverse effects, is costly, and is
without clear evidence of efficacy, and because it relies on a theory of beneficial effects of
various salts without clear evidentiary support, is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Balneotherapy,
Balneology; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries,
shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus
tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 7
articles in PubMed, 315 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane Library, 6 in Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 2from PubMed, 5 from Scopus, 0
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of
the 7 articles considered for inclusion, 3 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Spa, Spa Therapy;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 7 articles in
PubMed, 347 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 4 in Cochrane Library, 51 in Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources†. We considered for inclusion 2 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

93

0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 2 articles
considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MASSAGE
Massage is a commonly used treatment for chronic muscular pain administered by multiple
clinicians as well as family or friends. It is most typically used for treatment of spine and
torso pain (see Chronic Pain and Low Back Disorders guidelines). It has been utilized for
treatment of shoulder disorders, including myofascial pain (see Trigger Points and
Myofascial Pain Syndrome). Alternatively, deep friction massage (DFM), a manual treatment
intended for tendon disorders, purportedly has some evidence in a foreign language
publication for the treatment of tendinopathy. However, there is a lack of supportive
English-language publications or isolated evaluation of DFM as a treatment modality (743).
Massage has been used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies (744) (745) (746).
MASSAGE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN OR ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against use of massage for rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is one quality trial of massage for shoulder disorders, but it evaluated a long list of
diagnoses including arthritis, precluding an assessment of benefits for treatment of specific
shoulder pain or rotator cuff tendinopathy patients (van den Dolder et al., 2003). Thus,
there is no recommendation for or against use of massage for treatment of shoulder
tendinopathies. There are other indications for massage therapy.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: massage; rotator
cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

94

trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 37 articles in
PubMed, 860 in Scopus, 48 in CINAHL, 38 in Cochrane Library, 239 in Google Scholar, and 1
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 2 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 4
articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 2 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

REFLEXOLOGY
Reflexology is a complementary or alternative treatment. It entails the physical act of
applying pressure to the feet and hands with specific thumb, finger and hand techniques
without the use of oil or lotion. Reflexology is based on a system of zones and reflex areas
that reflect an image of the body on the feet and hands with a premise that such work
effects a physical change to the body. Reflexology is an alternative medicine practice
consisting of applications of pressure to specific points on the hands, feet, and ears (747) (748)
(749)
.
REFLEXOLOGY FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN OR ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Reflexology is not recommended for treatment of shoulder pain including rotator cuff
tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Rationale
There are no quality studies of reflexology. It also has not been shown to be efficacious for
the treatment of chronic LBP in a moderate-quality study (Poole et al., 2007). Other
treatments have been shown to be efficacious and a supportive mechanism for efficacy is
inapparent; thus, it is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Reflexology, Zone
Therapy; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

95

shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus
tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed
175 articles in PubMed, 25 in Scopus, 24 in CINAHL, 6 in Cochrane Library, 474 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 1 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ACUPUNCTURE
Acupuncture has been primarily used to treat myofascial (750) and shoulder girdle pain (see
Trigger Points/Myofascial Pain). While it has also been used to treat rotator cuff
tendinopathies (751-754), a Cochrane review noted there were few trials of quality with “little
can be concluded” (755), while one systematic review recommends acupuncture as a
conservative treatment option (756). There are different techniques utilized, including
acupuncture, superficial dry needling and deep dry needling (757). Acupuncture is further
discussed in the Low Back Disorders and Chronic Pain Guideline. Acupuncture has been used
to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies (758-763).
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC OR POSTOPERATIVE SHOULDER PAIN, ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHIES, OR IMPINGEMENT SYNDROME
Sometimes Recommended
Acupuncture is recommended for select use in chronic shoulder pain and rotator cuff
tendinopathies or post-operative pain only as an adjunct to more efficacious treatments.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
As a tertiary treatment if NSAIDs, active exercises, injections, and surgery (if indicated) fail
to resolve or sufficiently improve pain.
Benefits
Modest reduction in pain.
Harms

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

96

Rare needling of deep tissue, such as artery, lung, etc. and resultant complications. Use of
acupuncture may theoretically increase reliance on passive modality(ies) for chronic pain.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Frequency and duration pattern in the quality trial was weekly for 8 weeks. An initial trial of
4 appointments would appear reasonable in combination with a conditioning program of
aerobic and strengthening exercises. An additional 4 appointments should be tied to
improvements in objective measures after the first 4 treatments, for a total of 8 (de Hoyos
et al., 2004). If acupuncture is trialed in a patient, objective functional improvement should
be demonstrated after 6 visits.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution, intolerance, non-compliance including non-compliance with aerobic and
strengthening exercises, no functional gains demonstrated.
Rationale
There are no high-quality, sham-controlled trials of acupuncture for treatment of shoulder
disorders. There also are no high-quality comparative trials. Many trials mixed diagnoses.
Among the trials that attempted shams (Nabeta et al., 2002, de Hoyos et al., 2004,
Kleinhenz et al., 1999, Moore et al., 1976), most did not report the success of the sham,
nearly all had the potential for unblinding, and the trial that did report patient assignment
beliefs trended towards unblinding (Kleinhenz et al., 1999). Despite these weaknesses, two
trials reported efficacy of acupuncture compared with sham (Kleinhenz et al., 1999,
Gilbertson et al., 2003), one reported equivalency (Nabeta et al., 2002), and one reported
inferiority (Moore et al., 1976). Many trials had multiple co-interventions, precluding
assessment of efficacy (Johansson et al., 2005, Vas et al., 2008, Koh et al., 2013, Gilbertson
et al., 2003, Szczurko et al., 2009). Thus, the available RCTs have significant methodological
weaknesses, resulting in a lack of a clear evidence-base. By contrast, the quality trials for
treatment of low back disorders provide more clear evidence of potential efficacy (see Low
Back Disorders).
One trial suggested comparable outcomes with ultrasound (Johansson et al., 2005). The
results of one trial of electroacupuncture appeared to persist beyond discontinuation of the
treatment (de Hoyos et al., 2004). A trial in post-operative patients suggested benefits
(Gilbertson et al., 2003). Acupuncture when performed by experienced professionals is
minimally invasive, has minimal adverse effects, and is moderately costly. Despite significant
reservations regarding its true mechanism of action, a limited course of acupuncture may be
recommended for select treatment of chronic rotator cuff tendinopathies as an adjunct to
an efficacious exercise program. Acupuncture is recommended to assist in increasing
functional activity levels more rapidly; the primary attention should remain on the exercise
program and document functional gain. In those not involved in an exercise program, or
who are non-compliant with graded increases in activity levels, this intervention is not
recommended.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

97

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Acupuncture;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 1 article in
PubMed, 1678 in Scopus, 127 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 275 in Google Scholar, and
13 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 3 from Scopus, 2 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 13 from other sources. Of the
19 articles considered for inclusion, 14 randomized trials and 2 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MANIPULATION, MOBILIZATION, AND MANUAL THERAPY
Manual therapy, manipulation, and mobilization to the shoulder girdle and spine have been
used to treat shoulder problems, mostly in patients with adhesive capsulitis, some with
impingement syndrome (764-772) and general shoulder pain (773). This has included thoracic
spine thrust manipulation utilized for treatment of impingement syndrome (774-776). Manual
therapy, manipulation, and mobilization have been used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies
by using joint movements, soft tissue massage, and stretches (777-815).
MANIPULATION OF THE THORACIC SPINE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC SHOULDER
PAIN OR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Manipulation of the thoracic spine is not recommended for rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Moderately Not Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
Sham-controlled evidence in the higher quality studies consistently suggests that neither
thoracic manipulation (Michener LA, 2015, Riley, 2015, Riley, 2015) nor cervical
manipulation show evidence of efficacy (Cook, 2014). Thus, manipulation targeting the neck
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

98

or thoracic spine to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies are not recommended. There are few
studies of manipulation targeting the shoulder joint (Winters et al., 1997, Winters et al.,
1999, Bergman et al., 2004), and these studies have considerable weaknesses that preclude
an evidence-based recommendation. Thus, there is no recommendation for manipulation
targeting the shoulder joint.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Manual Therapy,
Manipulation, and Mobilization; dynamic humeral centering, mulligan mobilization, rotator
cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 162 articles
in PubMed, 5719 in Scopus, 196 in CINAHL, 267 in Cochrane Library, 1238 in Google Scholar,
and 11 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 3 from Scopus, 8
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 11 from other sources.
Of the 51 articles considered for inclusion, 10 randomized trials and 8 systematic reviews
met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MANIPULATION OF THE CERVICAL SPINE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC SHOULDER
PAIN OR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Manipulation of the cervical spine is not recommended for rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
Sham-controlled evidence in the higher quality studies consistently suggests that neither
thoracic manipulation (Michener LA, 2015, Riley, 2015, Riley, 2015) nor cervical
manipulation show evidence of efficacy (Cook, 2014). Thus, manipulation targeting the neck

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

99

or thoracic spine to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies are not recommended. There are few
studies of manipulation targeting the shoulder joint (Winters et al., 1999, Winters et al.,
1997, Bergman et al., 2004), and these studies have considerable weaknesses that preclude
an evidence-based recommendation. Thus, there is no recommendation for manipulation
targeting the shoulder joint.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Manual Therapy,
Manipulation, and Mobilization; dynamic humeral centering, mulligan mobilization, rotator
cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 162 articles
in PubMed, 5719 in Scopus, 196 in CINAHL, 267 in Cochrane Library, 1238 in Google Scholar,
and 11 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 3 from Scopus, 8
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 11 from other sources.
Of the 51 articles considered for inclusion, 36 randomized trials and 8 systematic reviews
met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MANIPULATION OF THE SHOULDER FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN
OR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against manipulation of the shoulder for treatment of
acute, subacute, or chronic rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Sham-controlled evidence in the higher quality studies consistently suggests that neither
thoracic manipulation (Michener LA, 2015, Riley, 2015, Riley, 2015) nor cervical

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

100

manipulation show evidence of efficacy (Cook, 2014). Thus, manipulation targeting the neck
or thoracic spine to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies are not recommended. There are few
studies of manipulation targeting the shoulder joint (Winters et al., 1999, Winters et al.,
1997, Bergman et al., 2004), and these studies have considerable weaknesses that preclude
an evidence-based recommendation. Thus, there is no recommendation for manipulation
targeting the shoulder joint.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Manual Therapy,
Manipulation, and Mobilization; dynamic humeral centering, mulligan mobilization, rotator
cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 162 articles
in PubMed, 5719 in Scopus, 196 in CINAHL, 267 in Cochrane Library, 1238 in Google Scholar,
and 11 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 3 from Scopus, 8
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 11 from other sources.
Of the 51 articles considered for inclusion, 36 randomized trials and 8 systematic reviews
met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANUAL THERAPY OR MOBILIZATION OF THE SHOULDER FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR
CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN OR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against manual therapy or mobilization for treatment of
acute, subacute, or chronic rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality sham-controlled trials of mobilization/manual therapy. As there is no
evidence of efficacy, there is no recommendation.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

101

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Manual Therapy,
Manipulation, and Mobilization; dynamic humeral centering, mulligan mobilization, rotator
cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 162 articles
in PubMed, 5719 in Scopus, 196 in CINAHL, 267 in Cochrane Library, 1238 in Google Scholar,
and 10 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 3 from Scopus, 8
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 10 from other sources.
Of the 50 articles considered for inclusion, 35 randomized trials and 8 systematic reviews
met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANUAL THERAPY OR MOBILIZATION OF THE THORACIC SPINE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE,
OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN OR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Manual therapy or mobilization of the cervical spine and/or thoracic spine to target rotator
cuff tendinopathies are not recommended.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality sham-controlled trials of mobilization/manual therapy. One attempted
sham-controlled trial was of only 2 weeks duration and had no subsequent follow-up
(Delgado-Gil, 2015). Trials targeting the neck suggest lack of efficacy (Cook, 2014). Multiple
trials of mobilization had many co-interventions precluding assessment of efficacy (Satpute,
2015, Teys, 2013). Thus, there is no quality evidence and there is no recommendation for
mobilization/manual therapy of the shoulder.
As some evidence suggests inefficacy of neck mobilization for shoulder disorders and there
is a lack of plausibility, neck mobilization/manual therapy for rotator cuff tendinopathies is
not recommended.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

102

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Manual Therapy,
Manipulation, and Mobilization; dynamic humeral centering, mulligan mobilization, rotator
cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 162 articles
in PubMed, 5719 in Scopus, 196 in CINAHL, 267 in Cochrane Library, 1238 in Google Scholar,
and 10 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 3 from Scopus, 8
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 10 from other sources.
Of the 50 articles considered for inclusion, 35 randomized trials and 8 systematic reviews
met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANUAL THERAPY OR MOBILIZATION OF THE CERVICAL SPINE FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR
CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN OR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Manual therapy or mobilization of the cervical spine to target rotator cuff tendinopathies is
not recommended.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
There are no quality sham-controlled trials of mobilization/manual therapy. One attempted
sham-controlled trial was of only 2 weeks duration and had no subsequent follow-up
(Delgado-Gil, 2015). Trials targeting the neck suggest lack of efficacy (Cook, 2014). Multiple
trials of mobilization had many co-interventions precluding assessment of efficacy (Satpute,
2015, Teys, 2013). Thus, there is no quality evidence and there is no recommendation for
mobilization/manual therapy of the shoulder.
As some evidence suggests inefficacy of neck mobilization for shoulder disorders and there
is a lack of plausibility, neck mobilization/manual therapy for rotator cuff tendinopathies is
not recommended.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

103

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Manual Therapy,
Manipulation, and Mobilization; dynamic humeral centering, mulligan mobilization, rotator
cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 162 articles
in PubMed, 5719 in Scopus, 196 in CINAHL, 267 in Cochrane Library, 1238 in Google Scholar,
and 10 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 3 from Scopus, 8
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 10 from other sources.
Of the 50 articles considered for inclusion, 35 randomized trials and 8 systematic reviews
met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

CONTINUOUS PASSIVE MOTION
Continuous passive motion (CPM) has been used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies (816-823).
CONTINUOUS PASSIVE MOTION FOR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY AFTER ROTATOR
CUFF REPAIR
Recommended
Continuous passive motion is recommended for the treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathy
after rotator cuff repair.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

104

Post-operative rehabilitation, typically for not longer than approximately 2-4 weeks during
which time ROM exercises are instituted and advanced.
Benefits
Improved and earlier range of motion, theoretically reduced risk of adhesive capsulitis.
Harms
Reliance on an appliance rather than functional exercise, which may delay recovery.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
2 hours/day was used in the one trial suggesting efficacy (Garofalo et al., 2010).
Indications for discontinuation
Recovery, non-compliance, intolerance.
Rationale
One trial found CPM was associated with early benefits in ROM and pain relief, although
there were no long term benefits (Garofalo et al., 2010). One trial found CPM was not
associated with better outcomes, rather better outcomes were associated with active
rehabilitation (Lee et al., 2012). CPM has conflicting and sparse evidence regarding efficacy,
is often used to help assure some ROM is performed and thus is recommended; however,
institution of active exercises appears beneficial and is recommended to be emphasized.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Continuous
Passive Motion; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 115 articles in PubMed, 1462 in Scopus, 14 in CINAHL, 32 in
Cochrane Library, 601 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 5 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane Library, 2 from
Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources. Of the 10 articles considered for inclusion, 4
randomized trials and 4 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

105

review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

HOT AND COLD THERAPIES
CRYOTHERAPY
Cold and heat may have actual therapeutic benefits to modify the disease processes (e.g.,
cold to allegedly reduce acute inflammation and swelling, and heat to speed healing through
increased blood supply) (824,825). However, others propose that these various modalities are
distractants that apparently do not materially alter the clinical course (826). Still others
postulate that the distractants allow increased activity levels. Thus, even though distractants
might not directly modify the disease processes, this theory supports using these modalities
through indirect mechanism(s) of action (827). Many patients with pain report a temporary
soothing effect from the application of heat or the use of ice packs in the home setting.
Cryotherapy is used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies (31-33,51,569,570,828). Cold or
cryotherapies involve applications of cold or cooling devices to the skin. They have been
used for treatment of non-operative pain and post-operative pain (829).
HOME USE OF CRYOTHERAPIES FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, CHRONIC, OR PERI-OPERATIVE
SHOULDER PAIN AND ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Cryotherapies are recommended for home use for the temporary relief of acute, subacute,
chronic, or peri-operative shoulder pain or rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Acute, subacute, chronic, or peri-operative shoulder pain or rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Benefits
Potential modest reduction in shoulder pain. Self-efficacy, although relying on a passive
modality.
Harms
Cold injuries. Time may be devoted to passive modality instead of active exercises.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Applications may be periodic or continuous. Applications should be home-based as there is
no evidence for superiority of clinician-based heat treatments. Primary emphasis should

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

106

generally be on functional restoration program elements, rather than on passive treatments
in patients with chronic pain. Education regarding home cryotherapy application should be
part of the treatment plan if heat has been effective for reducing pain. Self-applications 1520 minutes, 3-5 times/day is a typical regimen. There are no quality trials to address
frequencies.
Indications for discontinuation
Non-tolerance, including exacerbation of shoulder pain.
Rationale
One comparative trial found equivalent results for either cryotherapy or a therapist-applied
shoulder glide (Srivastava et al., 2018). Another comparative trial found no differences
between gradual loading of isometric lateral rotation and abduction exercise program and
cryotherapy (Dupuis et al., 2018). A low-quality trial found cryotherapy improved pain and
range of motion (Parle et al., 2017). There is one moderate-quality trial for post-operative
treatment; however, there were no clinical results (Osbahr et al., 2002). Education regarding
home cryotherapy application may be part of the treatment if cold is effective in reducing
pain. Self applications of cryotherapies using towels or reusable devices are non-invasive,
minimal cost, and without complications. Other forms of cryotherapy, including
trademarked devices have no evidence of superiority and can be considerably more
expensive, including chemicals or cryotherapeutic applications in clinical settings and are
not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Cryotherapy; ice,
cold temperature, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 10 articles in PubMed, 264 in Scopus, 28,840 in CINAHL, 15 in
Cochrane Library, 2,756 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 2 from PubMed, 4 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources. Of the 8 articles considered for inclusion, 6
randomized trials and 1 systematic review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

107

HEAT THERAPY
Many forms of heat therapy have been used to treat musculoskeletal pain including hot
packs, moist hot packs, sauna, warm baths, infrared, diathermy, and ultrasound. The depth
of penetration of some heating agents is minimal since transmission is via conduction or
convection, but other modalities have deeper penetration (830). A particular methodological
problem with most studies of heat therapy is that despite occasional attempts at, and claims
of successful blinding, it is essentially impossible to blind the patient from these
interventions as they produce noticeable, perceptible tissue warming. Not surprisingly,
some of these heat-related modalities have been shown to reduce pain ratings more than
placebo for low back pain patients (see Low Back Disorders). It is less clear whether there
are meaningful, long-term benefits. Heat therapies are passive treatments. In chronic pain
settings, use of heat should be minimized to self-treatments of flare-ups with primary
emphasis on functional restoration elements (e.g., exercises).
HEAT THERAPY FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN AND ROTATOR
CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Self-application of low-tech heat therapy is recommended for acute, subacute, chronic or
post-operative shoulder pain.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Acute, subacute, chronic, or post-operative shoulder pain or rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Benefits
Potential modest reduction in shoulder pain. Self-efficacy, although relying on a passive
modality.
Harms
Heat injuries. Time may be devoted to passive modality instead of active exercises.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Applications may be periodic or continuous. Applications should be home-based as there is
no evidence for superiority of clinician-based heat treatments. Primary emphasis should
generally be on functional restoration program elements, rather than on passive treatments
in patients with chronic pain. Education regarding home heat application should be part of
the treatment plan if heat has been effective for reducing pain. Self-applications 15-20
minutes, 3-5 times/day is a typical regimen. There are no quality trials to address
frequencies.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

108

Indications for discontinuation
Intolerance, increased pain, development of a burn, other adverse event.
Rationale
There is no quality evidence using typical self-applied forms of heat therapy. Self
applications of heat using towels or reusable devices are non-invasive, minimal cost and
without complications. Heat is not commonly used in acute situations (first few days);
however, evidence suggests heat is effective for acute LBP (see Low Back Disorders). Thus,
efficacy for acute pain is unclear. Other forms of heat can be considerably more expensive,
including chemical applications in clinical settings and are not recommended. There is one
moderate quality study suggesting hyperthermia is superior to ultrasound for patients with
supraspinatus tendinopathies in athletes, although that did not involve self-application of
heat (Giombini et al., 2006).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: heat therapy;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 84 articles in
PubMed, 433 in Scopus, 22 in CINAHL, 4 in Cochrane Library, 546 in Google Scholar, and 2
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources. Of the 2
article considered for inclusion, 2 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

DIATHERMY AND INFRARED THERAPY
There are many commercial modalities used to deliver heat; these generally differ on how
deeply the heat is felt. None of these modalities other than ultrasound have demonstrated
major efficacy for any disorder, however, there have been limited uses for treatment of
specific disorder with a specific intervention (see Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders, Elbow
Disorders, Low Back Disorders, and Chronic Pain Guideline). Diathermy and infrared therapy
have been used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies (831-835).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

109

DIATHERMY FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN OR ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of diathermy for the treatment of acute,
subacute, or chronic shoulder pain or rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
One RCT found a lack of efficacy of microwave diathermy compared with placebo (Akyol et
al., 2012). Another RCT suggested efficacy of short-wave diathermy (Yilmaz Kaysin et al.,
2018). While they are not invasive and have low complication rates, diathermy and infrared
therapy are moderate to high cost depending on the number of treatments. With conflicting
evidence of efficacy, there is no recommendation for or against their use to treat shoulder
pain.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Diathermy and
Infrared Therapy; hyperthermia, heat, microwave, tecar therapy, rotator cuff tendinopathy,
rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome,
calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 158 articles in PubMed, 607 in
Scopus, 29 in CINAHL, 41 in Cochrane Library, 60 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 3 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 1
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 6 articles
considered for inclusion, 4 randomized trials and 1 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
INFRARED THERAPY FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN OR ROTATOR
CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

110

There is no recommendation for or against the use of infrared therapy for the treatment of
acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain or rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
One RCT found a lack of efficacy of microwave diathermy compared with placebo (Akyol et
al., 2012). Another RCT suggested efficacy of short-wave diathermy (Yilmaz Kaysin et al.,
2018). While they are not invasive and have low complication rates, diathermy and infrared
therapy are moderate to high cost depending on the number of treatments. With conflicting
evidence of efficacy, there is no recommendation for or against their use to treat shoulder
pain.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Diathermy and
Infrared Therapy; hyperthermia, heat, microwave, tecar therapy, rotator cuff tendinopathy,
rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome,
calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 158 articles in PubMed, 607 in
Scopus, 29 in CINAHL, 41 in Cochrane Library, 60 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 3 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 1
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 6 articles
considered for inclusion, 4 randomized trials and 1 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ULTRASOUND
Ultrasound has been used for treatment of rotator cuff tendinitis and calcific tendinitis (836854)
. Ultrasound has also been used to guide needling (see separate recommendation on
ultrasound-guided needling).
ULTRASOUND FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN OR ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

111

Ultrasound is not recommended for the treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder
pain or rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Moderately Not Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
The largest, highest quality blinded sham-controlled study of shoulder soft tissue disorders
found a lack of efficacy of ultrasound vs. sham (van der Heijden et al., 1997). Most of the
other trials found no benefits compared to sham or other active treatments (Johansson et
al., 2005). One moderate-quality trial found efficacy for treatment of patients with calcific
tendinitis (Ebenbichler et al., 1999). Another moderate-quality trial with a much smaller
sample size that combined ultrasound with acetic acid iontophoresis found a lack of efficacy
(Perron et al., 1997). Ultrasound is not invasive, has low adverse effects, but is moderate to
high cost depending on the number of treatments. It is recommended for treatment of
calcific tendinitis as the highest quality, largest sample sized-study documents efficacy.
However, it is not recommended for shoulder pain to include tendinopathies other than
calcific tendinitis, as there is not clear documentation of efficacy for other than patients
with calcific tendinitis. As there is no evidence for efficacy of ultrasound for non-calcific
tendinitis shoulder pain, home units are also not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Ultrasound;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 423 articles
in PubMed, 4207 in Scopus, 143 in CINAHL, 88 in Cochrane Library, 1200 in Google Scholar,
and 7 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 4 from Scopus, 2
from CINAHL, 2 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 7 from other sources. Of
the 20 articles considered for inclusion, 7 randomized trials and 6 systematic reviews met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ULTRASOUND FOR CALCIFIC TENDINITIS

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

112

Recommended
Ultrasound is recommended for the treatment of calcific tendinitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Symptomatic calcific rotator cuff tendinitis.
Benefits
Improved pain control
Harms
Negligible
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Ultrasound (0. 89MHz, 2. 5W/cm2) up to 24, 15-minute sessions, daily for 5 weeks, then 3 a
week for 3 weeks (Ebenbichler et al., 1999).
Indications for discontinuation
Intolerance, adverse effect or resolution of pain.
Rationale
One moderate-quality trial found efficacy for treatment of patients with calcific tendinitis
(Ebenbichler et al., 1999), although a 10-year outcomes study found comparable rates of
resolution of the calcium deposits (Pieber, 2018). Another RCT also suggested efficacy
(Shomoto, 2002). Ultrasound is not invasive, has low adverse effects, but is moderate to
high cost depending on the number of treatments. It is recommended for treatment of
calcific tendinitis as the highest quality, largest sample sized-study documents efficacy. As
there is evidence of efficacy, but not for home units, there is no recommendation for or
against use of home ultrasound units.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: ultrasound,
ultrasonography; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

113

randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 423 articles in PubMed, 4207 in Scopus, 143 in CINAHL, 88 in
Cochrane Library, 1200 in Google Scholar, and 7 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 4 from PubMed, 4 from Scopus, 2 from CINAHL, 2 from Cochrane Library, 1 from
Google Scholar, and 7 from other sources. Of the 20 articles considered for inclusion, 3
randomized trials and 6 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

LOW-LEVEL LASER THERAPY
Low-level laser treatment (LLLT) usually involves laser energy that does not induce
significant heating. It is theorized that the mechanism of action is through photoactivation
of the oxidative chain and has been used for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies (838,855870)
.
LOW-LEVEL LASER THERAPY FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN OR
ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Low-level laser therapy is not recommended for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Moderately Not Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
There are six sham-controlled trials, nearly all assessing additive benefit to exercise
programs (England et al., 1989, Vecchio et al., 1993, Dogan et al., 2010, Abrisham et al.,
2011, Bingol et al., 2005, Yeldan et al., 2009). Four of the six found no benefits of the laser
(Vecchio et al., 1993, Dogan et al., 2010, Bingol et al., 2005, Yeldan et al., 2009). One of the
two studies suggesting benefits only followed patients for two weeks (Abrisham et al.,
2011), and was therefore insufficient for producing a guideline recommendation on efficacy
for chronic pain conditions. One trial suggested comparable (in)efficacy between LLLT and
US (Yavuz et al., 2014). Thus, the literature largely suggests LLLT is ineffective for shoulder
pain. LLLT is not invasive, has few adverse effects, but is costly. As most data suggest a lack
of efficacy, LLLT is not recommended for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Low-level laser

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

114

Therapy, laser therapies; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator
cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 39 articles in PubMed, 610 in Scopus, 26 in CINAHL, 14 in Cochrane
Library, 118 in Google Scholar, and 8 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 4
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 8 from other sources. Of the 13 articles considered for inclusion, 11
randomized trials and 1 systematic review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MEDICATIONS
NSAIDS AND ACETAMINOPHEN
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been widely used to treat shoulder
pain, including tendinoses (871-872), as well as post-operative patients. Acetaminophen and
paracetamol are sometimes utilized to treat shoulder pain, although their effects on
cyclooxygenase activity are minimal, they are not considered to have significant antiinflammatory properties and the overall evidence suggests NSAIDs have superior efficacy.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are used to treat pain, fever, and inflammation (873894)
.
NSAIDS FOR TREATMENT OF ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES AND SHOULDER PAIN
Recommended
NSAIDs are recommended for treatment of acute, subacute, and chronic shoulder pain,
including rotator cuff tendinopathies. Acetaminophen is a reasonable alternative, although
evidence indicates it is modestly less efficacious.
Generally, generic ibuprofen, naproxen or other older generation NSAIDs are recommended
as first-line medications. Second-line medications should generally include one of the other
generic NSAIDs. Options for those at increased risk of gastrointestinal complications
(especially a history of gastrointestinal bleeding or prior history of peptic ulcer disease)
include COX-2 selective agents, proton pump inhibitors, high-dose misoprostol, and
sucralfate.
Strength of evidence Strongly Recommended, Evidence (A)
Level of confidence High

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

115

Indications
For acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain including rotator cuff tendinopathies, NSAIDs
are recommended for treatment (Berry et al., 1980, Adebajo et al., 1990, Petri et al., 1987,
Mena et al., 1986). Over-the-counter (OTC) agents may suffice and may be tried first.
Benefits
Modest reduction in shoulder pain and earlier recovery. Pain improvements without
impairments other medications cause.
Harms
Generally negligible in young healthy patients. Gastrointestinal bleeding, other bleeding,
and possible delayed fracture healing. Possible elevated cardiovascular risks including
myocardial infarction, especially for high-dose COX-2 inhibitors and NSAIDS that have a
moderate-degree of COX inhibition such as with diclofenac. Renal failure may occur
particularly in the elderly or those with otherwise compromised function.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
See manufacturer’s recommendations. Generally, in acute shoulder pain patients, scheduled
dosage rather than as needed is preferable. As needed prescriptions may be reasonable for
mild or moderate pain, while scheduled usage, rather than as-needed, for treatment of
more severe pain especially if there is consideration for adjunctive treatment with muscle
relaxants, opioids, or other potentially impairing medications. Once the patient moves to a
supportive long-term care plan for chronic shoulder pain, the patient may revert to selective
use for “flare ups,” with some patients also using NSAIDs to maintain work status and
function.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of shoulder pain, lack of efficacy, or development of adverse effects that
necessitate discontinuation.
Rationale
The literature base for the treatment of musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) is long and deep
(mostly low back pain and arthroses). Thus, most literature on the use of NSAIDs to treat
shoulder disorders consists of comparable efficacy studies and some studies also include
mixtures of patient diagnoses. Still, there are a few high- and moderate-quality RCTs
including a placebo arm, all of which show efficacy of NSAIDs compared with placebo for
treatment of rotator cuff tendinitis, shoulder pain and shoulder bursitis (Petri et al., 2004,
Adebajo et al., 1990, Mena et al., 1986).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

116

Nearly all of the comparable efficacy literature for NSAIDs reported equivalency (Bertin et
al., 2003, Vidal et al., 2001, Smith et al., 1986). One high-quality study found equivalency
between celecoxib and naproxen for the treatment of acute shoulder tendinitis or bursitis
patients (Bertin et al., 2003). Another high-quality study found equivalency between
piroxicam and meloxicam for treatment of acute rotator cuff tendinitis, impingement
syndrome and bicipital tendinitis (Vidal et al., 2001). Multiple moderate-quality studies
found equivalency between various NSAIDs for treatment of diagnoses that included
shoulder tendinitis or bursitis (Petri et al., 2004, Petri et al., 1987, Smith et al., 1986,
Lecomte et al., 1994, Hayes et al., 1984, Wober, 1999, Huskisson et al., 1983, Duke et al.,
1981, Rhind et al., 1982). One trial found equivalence for piroxicam and naproxen for the
treatment of chronic shoulder pain (Smith et al., 1986). There is one trial that is the
exception, reporting piroxicam superior to naproxen (McIlwain et al., 1988).
One RCT found higher retear rates among celecoxib treated patients compared with
ibuprofen or tramadol (Oh et al., 2018), and speculated this may be due to a Cox-2
inhibitory effect. Multiple RCTs found superiority of glucocorticosteroid injection to NSAID
(Adebajo et al., 1990, Petri et al., 1987), while one found equivalence (White et al., 1986).
There are several classes of NSAIDs: 1) salicylates [aspirin, diflunisal, salicyl salicylate
(salsalate)], 2) arylalkanoic acids (diclofenac, etodolac, ketorolac, nabumetone, sulindac,
tolmetin), 3) 2-arylpropionic acids (ibuprofen, fenoprofen, ketoprofen, naproxen), 4) narylanthranilic acids (mefenamic acid), 5) oxicams (piroxicam, meloxicam), 6) COX-2
inhibitors (celecoxib, rofecoxib, etoricoxib), and 7) sulphonanilides (nimesulide).
Acetaminophen is considered an analgesic that is not an anti-inflammatory agent.
Acetaminophen blocks the activation of COX by another enzyme, peroxidase. Tissues with
high levels of peroxidase (i.e., platelets and immune cells) are “resistant” to acetaminophen,
but tissues with low levels of peroxidase (i.e., nerve and endothelial cells that participate in
pain and fever) are “sensitive” to acetaminophen (Boutaud et al., 2002).
There are two isoenzymes of cyclooxygenase, COX-1 and COX-2. NSAIDs are (non) selective
to different degrees. COX-2 selective agents were designed to reduce inflammation while
not increasing risks for gastrointestinal bleeding. It appears that certain COX-2 selective
agents may increase the risk of cardiovascular events.
There is a dearth of trials comparing the various NSAIDs, and the doses used are at times
submaximal in some of the comparative arms of the trials, raising problems with direct
comparability to help guide specific NSAID selection.
Cardiovascular risks of NSAIDs are somewhat controversial (Antman et al., 2007). Most
studies have suggested elevated risks with high-dose rofecoxib, few have shown elevated
risks with ibuprofen or naproxen, and there is some evidence for increasing risks with
greater degrees of COX-2 inhibition (McGettigan et al., 2011, McGettigan et al., 2006,
Bombardier et al., 2000, Fosbol et al., 2010, Fosbol et al., 2010, Nussmeier et al., 2005, Ott
et al., 2003, Trelle et al., 2011). The sequence of NSAIDs from lowest COX-2 to highest varies
somewhat between studies but is reportedly: flurbiprofen, ketoprofen, fenoprofen,
tolmetin, aspirin, oxaprozin, naproxen, indomethacin, ibuprofen, ketorolac, piroxicam,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

117

nabumetone, etodolac, celecoxib, meloxicam, mefenamic acid, diclofenac, rofecoxib and
nimesulide (Feldman et al., 2000).
There are few quality studies of acetaminophen as a single agent, and none exclusively for
shoulder pain. Most of the literature has been developed for treatment of low back pain
(see Low Back Disorders Guideline) (Chou et al., 2007, Dahners et al., 2004,
Jirarattanaphochai et al., 2008, Krismer et al., 2007, Kroenke et al., 2009, Kuijpers et al.,
2011, Last et al., 2009, Machado et al., 2009, Machado et al., 2015) or osteoarthrosis (see
Knee Disorders Guideline). Paracetamol, a close analog, has also been studied for LBP and
osteoarthrosis and has some evidence of mild efficacy in most trials (Davies et al., 2008),
although a review concluded it lacks efficacy (Machado et al., 2015). The direct evidence of
efficacy from the two available studies suggests paracetamol is not quite as successful at
alleviating pain as diflunisal (Hickey, 1982), mefenamic acid (Evans et al., 1980),
indomethacin (Evans et al., 1980), or aspirin (Evans et al., 1980). It also has relieved pain less
successfully than the muscle relaxants orphenadrine (McGuinness, 1983) and parazolidin
(McGuinness et al., 1969). It is interesting that paracetamol appears more effective in
combination with orphenadrine than as a single agent (Valtonen, 1975). Thus, while the
evidence suggests efficacy of acetaminophen and paracetamol, it appears these
medications are modestly less efficacious than NSAIDs (although safer).
NSAIDs are not invasive, have low side effect profiles in a healthy working-age patient
population, and when generic medications are used are low cost. The potential for NSAIDs
to increase the risk of cardiovascular events needs to be carefully considered in high-risk
patients and requires additional quality studies to fully address. There is substantial, quality
evidence that COX-2 selective NSAIDs reduce the risk of adverse GI effects (Baraf et al.,
2007, Bensen et al., 2000, Chan, 2005, FitzGerald et al., 2001, Bombardier et al., 2000).
Additionally, the four commonly used cytoprotective classes of drugs are proton pump
inhibitors, misoprostol, sucralfate, and double-dose histamine-type 2 receptor blockers (see
Hip and Groin Disorders Guideline for details).

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAID) ; COX-2 inhibitors, ketorolac, ibuprofen, dexketoprofen,
celecoxib, parecoxib, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 185 articles in PubMed, 599 in Scopus, 31 in CINAHL, 42 in
Cochrane Library, 46 in Google Scholar, and 23 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 8 from PubMed, 7 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane Library, 2 from
Google Scholar, and 23 from other sources. Of the 41 articles considered for inclusion, 33
randomized trials and 8 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

118

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
NSAIDS FOR TREATMENT OF PERIOPERATIVE OR POSTOPERATIVE SHOULDER PAIN
Recommended
NSAIDs are recommended for treatment of perioperative and postoperative shoulder pain,
including rotator cuff tendinopathies. Acetaminophen is a reasonable alternative, although
evidence indicates it is modestly less efficacious.
Generally, generic ibuprofen, naproxen or other older generation NSAIDs are recommended
as first-line medications. Second-line medications should generally include one of the other
generic NSAIDs. Options for those at increased risk of gastrointestinal complications
(especially a history of gastrointestinal bleeding or prior history of peptic ulcer disease)
include COX-2 selective agents, proton pump inhibitors, high-dose misoprostol, and
sucralfate.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence High
Indications
For perioperative and postoperative shoulder pain including rotator cuff tendinopathies,
NSAIDs are recommended for treatment (Berry et al., 1980, Adebajo et al., 1990, Petri et al.,
1987, Mena et al., 1986). Over-the-counter (OTC) agents may suffice and may be tried first.
Benefits
Modest reduction in shoulder pain and earlier recovery. Pain improvements without
impairments other medications cause.
Harms
Generally negligible in young healthy patients. Gastrointestinal bleeding, other bleeding,
and possible delayed fracture healing. Possible elevated cardiovascular risks including
myocardial infarction, especially for high-dose COX-2 inhibitors and NSAIDS that have a
moderate-degree of COX inhibition such as with diclofenac. Renal failure may occur
particularly in the elderly or those with otherwise compromised function.
Frequency/Dose/Duration

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

119

See manufacturer’s recommendations. Generally, in acute shoulder pain patients, scheduled
dosage rather than as needed is preferable. As needed prescriptions may be reasonable for
mild or moderate pain, while scheduled usage, rather than as-needed, for treatment of
more severe postoperative pain especially if there is consideration for adjunctive treatment
with muscle relaxants, opioids, or other potentially impairing medications. Generally, treat
post-operative patients for 2 to 8 weeks post-op unless complications occur.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of shoulder pain, lack of efficacy, or development of adverse effects that
necessitate discontinuation.
Rationale
The literature base for the treatment of musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) is long and deep
(mostly low back pain and arthroses). Thus, most literature on the use of NSAIDs to treat
shoulder disorders consists of comparable efficacy studies and some studies also include
mixtures of patient diagnoses.
Still, there are a few high- and moderate-quality RCTs including a placebo arm, all of which
show efficacy of NSAIDs compared with placebo for treatment of rotator cuff tendinitis,
shoulder pain, and shoulder bursitis (Petri et al., 2004, Adebajo et al., 1990, Mena et al.,
1986).
There are few trials of NSAIDS specifically for peri- and post-operative shoulder pain.
Regarding post-operative studies, one trial found ketoprofen superior to placebo (HoeHansen et al., 1999).
There is a dearth of trials comparing the various NSAIDs, and the doses used are at times
submaximal in some of the comparative arms of the trials, raising problems with direct
comparability to help guide specific NSAID selection.
NSAIDs are not invasive, have low side effect profiles in a healthy working-age patient
population, and when generic medications are used are low cost. The potential for NSAIDs
to increase the risk of cardiovascular events needs to be carefully considered in high-risk
patients and requires additional quality studies to fully address.
NSAIDS FOR PATIENTS AT RISK FOR CARDIOVASCULAR ADVERSE EFFECTS
Recommended
Patients with known cardiovascular disease or multiple risk factors for cardiovascular
disease should have the risks and benefits of NSAID therapy for pain discussed. Some
NSAIDs appear to have substantially different levels of cardiovascular risk. Aspirin is likely
the lowest risk, is cardioprotective, and available OTC, although it causes increased risk of GI
bleeding.
See Hip and Groin Disorders guideline for details.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

120

Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
PROTON PUMP INHIBITORS WITH NSAIDS FOR PATIENTS AT RISK FOR GI ADVERSE
EFFECTS
Recommended
Concomitant prescriptions of cytoprotective medications are recommended for patients at
substantially increased risk for gastrointestinal bleeding.
See Hip and Groin Disorders guideline for details.
Strength of evidence Strongly Recommended, Evidence (A)
Level of confidence High
MISOPROSTOL WITH NSAIDS FOR PATIENTS AT RISK FOR GI ADVERSE EFFECTS
Recommended
Concomitant prescriptions of cytoprotective medications are recommended for patients at
substantially increased risk for gastrointestinal bleeding.
Strength of evidence Strongly Recommended, Evidence (A)
Level of confidence High
SUCRALFATE WITH NSAIDS FOR PATIENTS AT RISK FOR GI ADVERSE EFFECTS
Recommended
Concomitant prescriptions of cytoprotective medications are recommended for patients at
substantially increased risk for gastrointestinal bleeding.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
H2 BLOCKERS WITH NSAIDS FOR PATIENTS AT RISK FOR GI ADVERSE EFFECTS
Recommended
Concomitant prescriptions of cytoprotective medications are recommended for patients at
substantially increased risk for gastrointestinal bleeding.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
ACETAMINOPHEN FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN
Recommended
Acetaminophen is recommended for acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain, particularly
for those with contraindications for NSAIDs.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

121

Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Shoulder pain, including acute, subacute, or chronic. Generally used as supplemental to
other treatments and particularly among those with reasons to avoid NSAIDs.
Benefits
Addresses shoulder pain without increased risk of cardiovascular event.
Harms
Less effective than NSAID. Hepatotoxicity, especially beyond 3. 5g/day and/or with other
liver disease(s).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
See manufacturer’s recommendations; may be utilized on an as-needed basis. It has been
suggested that 1gm doses are more effective than 650mg doses particularly in postoperative patients (listed, 2009, McQuay et al., 2002). However, this level is now above the
maximum dose recommended by an FDA advisory committee of 650mg. Evidence of hepatic
toxicity has been reported at 4gms a day in a few days particularly among those consuming
excessive alcohol.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, adverse effects, intolerance.
Rationale
There are no quality trials of acetaminophen for treatment of non-surgical shoulder
tendinitis or shoulder disorders. A low quality RCT found acetaminophen was inferior to
ibuprofen for rotator cuff related pain and had more dropouts the acetaminophen group
(AlRuthia et al., 2019).
Acetaminophen is considered an analgesic that is not anti-inflammatory. Acetaminophen
blocks the activation of COX by another enzyme, peroxidase. Tissues with high levels of
peroxidase (i.e., platelets and immune cells) are “resistant” to acetaminophen, but tissues
with low levels of peroxidase (i.e., nerve and endothelial cells that participate in pain and
fever) are “sensitive” to acetaminophen (Boutaud et al., 2002). The direct evidence of
efficacy from the two available studies suggests paracetamol is not quite as successful at
alleviating LBP as diflunisal (Hickey, 1982), mefenamic acid (Evans et al., 1980),
indomethacin (Evans et al., 1980), or aspirin (Evans et al., 1980). There is one trial suggesting
it is more efficacious than physiotherapy and manipulation (Doran et al., 1975), and worse

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

122

than electroacupuncture (Hackett et al., 1988). Acetaminophen was worse than
chlorzoxazone (Vernon, 1972) and was inferior to diflunisal even when combined with
codeine (Brown et al., 1986).
There are quality trials of other MSDs, which document efficacy for acetaminophen, but
inferiority to NSAIDs for treatment of pain (see Low Back Disorders guideline). Thus, by
analogy, there is evidence of efficacy for acetaminophen, it has low adverse effects in
employed populations, and it is recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Acetaminophen,
paracetamol; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 38 articles in PubMed, 1810 in Scopus, 20 in CINAHL, 20 in
Cochrane Library, 148 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 1 from PubMed, 4 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 6 articles considered for inclusion, 2
randomized trials and 1 systematic review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ACETAMINOPHEN FOR PERIOPERATIVE OR POSTOPERATIVE SHOULDER PAIN
Recommended
Acetaminophen is recommended for post-operative shoulder pain, particularly for those
with contraindications for NSAIDs.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Postoperative shoulder pain. Generally used as supplemental to other treatments and
particularly among those with reasons to avoid NSAIDs.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

123

Benefits
Addresses shoulder pain without increased risk of cardiovascular event.
Harms
Less effective than NSAID. Hepatotoxicity, especially beyond 3. 5g/day and/or with other
liver disease(s).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
See manufacturer’s recommendations; may be utilized on an as-needed basis. It has been
suggested that 1gm doses are more effective than 650mg doses particularly in postoperative patients (listed, 2009, McQuay et al., 2002). However, this level is now above the
maximum dose recommended by an FDA advisory committee of 650mg. Evidence of hepatic
toxicity has been reported at 4gms a day in a few days particularly among those consuming
excessive alcohol.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, adverse effects, intolerance.
Rationale
There are no quality trials of acetaminophen for treatment of non-surgical shoulder
tendinitis or shoulder disorders. A low quality RCT found acetaminophen was inferior to
ibuprofen for rotator cuff related pain and had more dropouts the acetaminophen group
(AlRuthia et al., 2019).
Regarding post-operative use, one moderate quality RCT found acetaminophen 1g every 6
hours the day before shoulder surgery and 1g every 8 hours for days 2-5 postoperatively to
be superior pain control compared with (i) oxycodone 5mg every 6 hours as needed and/or
acetaminophen 1g every 6 hours as needed and (ii) oxycodone 5mg every 6 hours as needed
without any acetaminophen (Singh et al., 2021).
There are quality trials of other MSDs, which document efficacy for acetaminophen, but
inferiority to NSAIDs for treatment of pain (see the Low Back Disorders guideline). Thus, by
analogy, there is evidence of efficacy for acetaminophen, it has low adverse effects in
employed populations, and it is recommended.

ANTIDEPRESSANTS
NOREPINEPHRINE REUPTAKE INHIBITING ANTI-DEPRESSANTS FOR SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC
SHOULDER GIRDLE PAIN, INCLUDING MYOFASCIAL PAIN SYNDROME AND SELECT CASES
OF ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

124

Norepinephrine reuptake inhibiting anti-depressants (including tricyclic antidepressants and
SNRIs) are recommended for subacute or chronic shoulder pain and myofascial pain
syndrome (see Chronic Pain Guideline), and a reasonable option for select rotator cuff
tendinopathy patients.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Subacute and chronic shoulder pain and myofascial pain; may be particularly helpful if there
is nocturnal sleep disruption, mild dysthymia, which may allow for nocturnal dosing of a
mildly sedating TCA. May be helpful for select rotator cuff tendinopathy patients especially
with moderate to severe pain that is ongoing, and/or sleep disrupting.
Benefits
Improvements in shoulder pain. May improve sleep quality.
Harms
Daytime somnolence, interference with work, dry mouth, cardiac risks, and other adverse
effects.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Low dose at night, gradually increased (e.g., amitriptyline 25mg QHS, increase by 25mg each
week) until a sub-maximal or maximal dose achieved, sufficient effects are achieved, or
adverse effects occur. Lower doses (e.g., amitriptyline, 25 to 75mg a day) avoid adverse
effects and the necessity of blood level monitoring, particularly as there is no evidence of
increased pain relief at higher doses. Imipramine is less sedating, thus if carryover daytime
sedation, it may be a better option. If patient cannot sleep, amitriptyline is the
recommended initial medication in this class. Duration for patients with subacute and
chronic shoulder pain may be indefinite, although most of these patients do not require
indefinite treatment, particularly if they are compliant with elements of a functional
restoration program.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, intolerance, development of adverse effects.
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating these agents for rotator cuff tendinopathies.
However, there are multiple placebo-controlled trials evaluating efficacy of anti-depressants
for treatment of low back pain, with nearly all studies evaluating chronic pain (see Low Back
Disorders Guideline). Some included patients with depression while some specifically sought

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

125

to exclude those with depression. Effects appear to differ by class of agent, with
norepinephrine reuptake inhibition appearing important.
Norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor anti-depressants are not invasive, have low to moderate
dose-dependent adverse effects at low doses, and are not costly in their generic
formulations. The degree to which depression or dysthymia is present may suggest earlier
use of these medications. Discussions with mental health professionals may be helpful,
particularly when mental health conditions are more severe. Norepinephrine reuptake
inhibiting anti-depressants are recommended for treatment of chronic shoulder pain, and
selectively recommended for those in whom NSAIDs are either ineffective or not indicated,
yet have need of a non-addicting medication to potentially assist with sleep in the acute to
subacute phases.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Norepinephrine
Reuptake Inhibitors; serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic
antidepressants rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 0 articles in PubMed, 180 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 26 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from
PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SELECTIVE SEROTONIN REUPTAKE INHIBITORS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC
SHOULDER PAIN AND ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are not recommended for treatment of
acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain or rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

126

Norepinephrine reuptake inhibiting anti-depressants (e.g., amitriptyline, doxepin,
imipramine, desipramine, nortriptyline, protriptyline, maprotiline, and clomipramine) and
mixed norepinephrine and serotonin inhibitors (venlafaxine, bupropion, and duloxetine)
have evidence of efficacy for treatment of chronic low back pain and some other chronic
pain conditions (see Low Back Disorders). However, SSRIs have evidence of efficacy for
fibromyalgia (see guideline), but quality evidence shows SSRIs are ineffective for typical
nociceptive pain (see Low Back Disorders and Chronic Pain Guideline). While there is no
quality evidence evaluating these medications for treatment of shoulder pain, SSRIs appear
unlikely to be effective for typical nociceptive pain such as rotator cuff tendinopathies and
thus are not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Selective
Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain,
rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial
bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 0 articles in PubMed, 304 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 61 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from
PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ANTICONVULSANTS
Anticonvulsant agents have been utilized off-label for treating some chronic pain syndromes
since the 1960s (895), particularly neuropathic pain (896). Anti-convulsants are thought to have
analgesic properties. Several have been used to manage chronic pain conditions including
carbamazepine, valproic acid, gabapentin, phenytoin, clonazepam, lamotrigine, tiagabine,
pregabalin, topiramate, levetiracetam, oxcarbazepine, and zonisamide (see Chronic Pain
Guideline). Anticonvulsant agents have been used to treat and prevent rotator cuff
tendinopathies (897).
ANTI-CONVULSANTS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN AND
ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

127

Anti-convulsants including topiramate, gabapentin, or pregabalin are not recommended for
treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain including rotator cuff
tendinopathies. Gabapentin is separately reviewed for perioperative use.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies assessing the use of anti-convulsant agents for patients with
shoulder pain. By analogy, there is quality evidence that gabapentin is ineffective (see Low
Back Disorders), and thus these medications are not recommended for treatment of
shoulder pain and rotator cuff tendinopathies. However, there is quality evidence that
gabapentin reduces need for opioids when administered as part of perioperative surgery
patients’ pain management and thus perioperative gabapentin use may be helpful for its
opioids-sparing potential (Bang et al., 2010, Pandey et al., 2004, Pandey et al., 2005,
Radhakrishnan et al., 2005, Turan et al., 2004).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Anticonvulsant
Agents; anticonvulsants, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator
cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 12 articles in PubMed, 294 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 5 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from
PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Of the 1 article considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0
systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Gabapentin;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 7 articles in
PubMed, 2486 in Scopus, 4 in CINAHL, 10 in Cochrane Library, 33 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 1 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 3
articles considered for inclusion, 0 randomized trials and 1 systematic review met the
inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

128

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
GABAPENTIN FOR PERIOPERATIVE TREATMENT OF ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for gabapentin for perioperative treatment of rotator cuff
tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is conflicting quality evidence regarding whether gabapentin improves outcomes
and/or reduces need for opioids when administered as part of perioperative shoulder
surgery patients’ pain management and thus there is no recommendation regarding
perioperative use of gabapentin (Bang et al., 2010, Spence et al., 2011). Spence reported no
beneficial adjunctive effect in addition to an interscalene block (Spence et al., 2011). A
beneficial effect has been described for other types of surgery elsewhere (Pandey et al.,
2005, Pandey et al., 2004, Radhakrishnan et al., 2005, Turan et al., 2004).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Anticonvulsant
Agents; anticonvulsants, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator
cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 12 articles in PubMed, 294 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 5 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from
PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Of the 1 article considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0
systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Gabapentin;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

129

trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 7 articles in
PubMed, 2486 in Scopus, 4 in CINAHL, 10 in Cochrane Library, 33 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 1 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 3
articles considered for inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 1 systematic review met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

OPIOIDS
See the ACOEM Opioids Guideline for recommendations and evidence.

SKELETAL MUSCLE RELAXANTS
Skeletal muscle relaxants comprise a diverse set of pharmaceuticals designed to produce
muscle relaxation through different mechanisms of action, generally considered to be
effects on the central nervous system (CNS) and not on skeletal muscle (898,899). These
medications are widely used in primary care to treat painful conditions, most prominently
spine pain (900,906), muscle spasms (907), and myalgias. They are sometimes used to treat
shoulder disorders, but are generally not indicated for chronic shoulder pain (908,909).
MUSCLE RELAXANTS FOR ACUTE OR SUBACUTE SHOULDER PAIN INCLUDING ROTATOR
CUFF TENDINOPATHIES WITH SIGNIFICANT MUSCLE SPASM
Recommended
Muscle relaxants are selectively recommended for acute or subacute, moderate to severe
shoulder pain including rotator cuff tendinopathies from muscle spasm that is unrelieved by
NSAIDs, avoidance of exacerbating exposures, or other measures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Moderate to severe acute and subacute shoulder pain with significant muscle spasm. This
includes rotator cuff tendinopathies and post-operative use.
Benefits
Modest reduction in pain compared with placebo anticipated based on analogies to spine
pain.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

130

Harms
Sedation, daytime fatigue. Modest potential for abuse. Risk for safety including motor
vehicle crash and other injuries.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Initial dose in evening (not during workdays or if patient operates a motor vehicle, though
daytime use acceptable if minimal CNS-sedating effects). If significant daytime somnolence
results, particularly if it interferes with performance of conditioning exercises and other
components of the rehabilitation process or treatment plan, discontinue or prescribe a
reduced dose. Duration for exacerbations of chronic pain is limited to a couple weeks.
Longer term treatment is generally not indicated.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, non-tolerance, significant sedating effects that carry over into the
daytime, other adverse effects.
Rationale
There are no quality studies of these agents for treatment of patients with shoulder pain.
Skeletal muscle relaxants have been evaluated in quality studies evaluating chronic back and
neck (Thelen et al., 2008, Kaya et al., 2010, Zanella et al., 2001), although there are far more
studies of acute LBP (see Chronic Pain, Low Back Disorders, and Cervical and Thoracic Spine
Guideline) (Salzmann et al., 1992). The quality of the studies comparing these agents to
placebo are likely overstated due to the unblinding that would be inherent in taking a drug
with substantial CNS-sedating effects. The adverse effect profile is concerning (Lofland et al.,
2001), with CNS-sedation rates ranging from approximately 25 to 50% and a low, but
definite, risk of abuse (Littrell et al., 1993, Toth et al., 2004). Thus, prescriptions for skeletal
muscle relaxants for daytime use should be carefully weighed against the need to drive
vehicles, operate machinery, or otherwise engage in occupations where mistakes in
judgment may have serious consequences (e.g., crane operators, air traffic controllers,
operators of motorized vehicles, construction workers, etc.). Skeletal muscle relaxants have
beneficial uses, particularly for nocturnal administration to normalize sleep patterns
disrupted by skeletal muscle pain, as well as for daytime use among the few patients who
do not suffer from CNS depressant effects and are low cost if generic medications are
prescribed. Skeletal muscle relaxants are not recommended for continuous management of
subacute or chronic shoulder pain, although they may be reasonable options for select
acute pain exacerbations or for a limited trial as a third- or fourth-line agent in more
severely affected patients in whom NSAIDs and exercise have failed to control symptoms.
Also not recommended for mild pain as other treatments are typically effective with lower
adverse effects. Carisoprodol is not recommended due to its abuse potential.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

131

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Skeletal Muscle
Relaxants; muscle relaxants, neuromuscular agents, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff
tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis,
subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed, 614 in Scopus, 1 in
CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 28 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SYSTEMIC GLUCOCORTICOSTEROIDS
Systemic glucocorticosteroids have been used for the treatment of rotator cuff
tendinopathies (910,911). Glucocorticosteroid injections are reviewed separately.
ORAL GLUCOCORTICOSTEROIDS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN OR
ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Oral glucocorticosteroids are not recommended for treatment of acute, subacute, or
chronic shoulder pain or rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is quality evidence that glucocorticosteroids injected in the subacromial space are
effective for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies. However, there are no quality
placebo-controlled trials of oral glucocorticoids. There is one moderate quality trial that
compared subacromial injection with intramuscular, with some outcomes suggesting
injections are superior and no outcomes suggesting intramuscular administrations are
superior (Ekeberg et al., 2009). Oral glucocorticoids have significant adverse effects, and
without evidence of efficacy, they are not recommended for treatment of acute, subacute,
or chronic shoulder pain including rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

132

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Systemic
Glucocorticosteroids; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 0 articles in PubMed, 18 in Scopus, 31 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane
Library, 413 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 2 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 2 from other sources. Of the 4 articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized
trials and 2 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

TOPICAL MEDICATIONS AND LIDOCAINE PATCHES
Topical medications include patches, capsaicin and sports creams, NSAIDs, wheatgrass
cream, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), N-acetylcysteine (NAC), and eutectic mixture of local
anesthetics (EMLA). Topical glyceryl trinitrate has been utilized for treatment of rotator cuff
disease (912). Capsaicin is applied to the skin as a cream or ointment. Possible mechanisms
for pain reduction include distraction by stimulating other nerve endings or killing afferent
sensory nerve fibers that subsequently regenerate. Rado-Salil ointment is a proprietary
formulation of 14 agents, the two most common are menthol (55. 1%) and methylsalicylate
(26.5%). There are many other commercial products that similarly cause a warm or cool
feeling in the skin. All of these agents are thought to work through a counter-irritant
mechanism (i.e., feel the dermal sensation rather than the pain). Topical NSAIDs have been
used to treat many different MSDs, including arthritis, lateral epicondylitis, and other
tendinoses (913,914). Many different NSAIDs are compounded, including ibuprofen, naproxen,
ketoprofen, piroxicam, and diclofenac.
Capsicum creams are frequently categorized as an herbal, topical treatment used for pain
management (915). Topical NSAIDS have been used for pain management (916,917). Topical
glyceryl trinitrate has been used to treat or prevent rotator cuff tendinopathies (912,918,919).
Topical lidocaine patches have been used to treat pain from rotator cuff tendinopathies (920926)
. Eutectic mixture of local anesthetics provides treatment for patients with rotator cuff
tendinopathy (927). Topical creams have been used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies (912,
918,919,928,930)
.
CAPSICUM CREAMS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN AND ROTATOR
CUFF TENDINOPATHY
Not Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

133

Capsicum is not recommended for treatment of shoulder pain or rotator cuff
tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies of capsicum for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies. The
target tissue is deep, resulting in difficulty of the medication reaching target tissue and thus
capsicum is not recommended for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Capsicum Creams;
capsaicin, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries,
shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus
tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0
articles in PubMed, 927 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 25 in Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources.
Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
TOPICAL NSAIDS (INCLUDING DICLOFENAC EPOLAMINE) FOR SHOULDER PAIN AND
ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
Not Recommended
Topical NSAIDs, including diclofenac epolamine, are not recommended for rotator cuff
tendinopathy or other shoulder pain as the target tissue is likely too deep to be treated
topically.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

134

There are no quality studies of topical NSAIDs to guide efficacy, the target tissue is deep
resulting in doubt regarding successful penetration to the target tissue, and thus topic
NSAIDs are not recommended for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies. There is
moderate quality evidence that diclofenac epolamine modestly accelerates clearing of a
hematoma on a limb (Klainguti et al., 2010, Hoffmann et al., 2012), resulting in potential
highly selective use of that relatively costly treatment. However, in general, there is not a
need to treat most hematomas as they are self-resolving.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Topical NSAIDS;
anti-inflammatory agents, non-steroidal, administration, topical, rotator cuff tendinopathy,
rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome,
calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 116 articles in PubMed, 445 in
Scopus, 7 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 27 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from
Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 1 article
considered for inclusion, 1 randomized control trial and 0 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

TOPICAL GLYCERYL TRINITRATE FOR SHOULDER PAIN AND ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
Not Recommended
Topical glyceryl trinitrate is not recommended for rotator cuff tendinopathy or other
shoulder pain as the target tissue is likely too deep to be treated topically.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies of size to guide efficacy for any of these agents. However, there
are some quality studies suggesting short- to intermediate-term benefits for some of these

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

135

agents for more superficial tissues (see Chronic Pain Guideline, Elbow Disorders, Hand,
Wrist, and Forearm Disorders). These agents, when demonstrated to have efficacy, appear
weakly effective. They might cause deleterious effects if used long-term. Topical
applications of anesthetic agents such as lidocaine over large areas are thought to carry
significant risk of potentially fatal adverse effects (FDA, 2009). As there is no quality
evidence of efficacy and the target tissue is deep, these topical agents are not
recommended for treatment of shoulder pain and rotator cuff tendinopathy.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Topical Glyceryl
Trinitrate; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries,
shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus
tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 8
articles in PubMed, 306 in Scopus, 3 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane Library, 39 in Google Scholar,
and 1 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 2 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0
from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of
the 4 articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 3 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

LIDOCAINE PATCHES FOR SHOULDER PAIN AND ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
Not Recommended
Lidocaine patches are not recommended for rotator cuff tendinopathy or other shoulder
pain as the target tissue is likely too deep to be treated topically.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies of size to guide efficacy for any of these agents. However, there
are some quality studies suggesting short- to intermediate-term benefits for some of these

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

136

agents for more superficial tissues (see Chronic Pain Guideline, Elbow Disorders, Hand,
Wrist, and Forearm Disorders). These agents, when demonstrated to have efficacy, appear
weakly effective. They might cause deleterious effects if used long-term. Topical
applications of anesthetic agents such as lidocaine over large areas are thought to carry
significant risk of potentially fatal adverse effects (FDA, 2009). As there is no quality
evidence of efficacy and the target tissue is deep, these topical agents are not
recommended for treatment of shoulder pain and rotator cuff tendinopathy.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Lidocaine Patches;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 1827 articles
in PubMed, 143 in Scopus, 26 in CINAHL, 60 in Cochrane Library, 113 in Google Scholar, and
0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 3 from PubMed, 4 from Scopus, 0 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 7
articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trials and 4 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

EUTECTIC MIXTURE OF LOCAL ANESTHETICS (EMLA) FOR SHOULDER PAIN AND ROTATOR
CUFF TENDINOPATHY
Not Recommended
Eutectic mixture of local anesthetics (EMLA) is not recommended for rotator cuff
tendinopathy or other shoulder pain as the target tissue is likely too deep to be treated
topically.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

137

There are no quality studies of size to guide efficacy for any of these agents. However, there
are some quality studies suggesting short- to intermediate-term benefits for some of these
agents for more superficial tissues (see Chronic Pain Guideline, Elbow Disorders, Hand,
Wrist, and Forearm Disorders). These agents, when demonstrated to have efficacy, appear
weakly effective. They might cause deleterious effects if used long-term. Topical
applications of anesthetic agents such as lidocaine over large areas are thought to carry
significant risk of potentially fatal adverse effects (FDA, 2009). As there is no quality
evidence of efficacy and the target tissue is deep, these topical agents are not
recommended for treatment of shoulder pain and rotator cuff tendinopathy.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Eutectic Mixture
of Local Anesthetics; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 1 article in PubMed, 26 in Scopus, 1 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane
Library, 13 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from
PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Of the 1 article considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trials and 0
systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

OTHER CREAMS/OINTMENTS FOR SHOULDER PAIN AND ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
Not Recommended
Other creams/ointments are not recommended for rotator cuff tendinopathy or other
shoulder pain as the target tissue is likely too deep to be treated topically.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

138

There are no quality studies of size to guide efficacy for any of these agents. However, there
are some quality studies suggesting short- to intermediate-term benefits for some of these
agents for more superficial tissues (see Chronic Pain Guideline, Elbow Disorders, Hand,
Wrist, and Forearm Disorders). These agents, when demonstrated to have efficacy, appear
weakly effective. They might cause deleterious effects if used long-term. Topical
applications of anesthetic agents such as lidocaine over large areas are thought to carry
significant risk of potentially fatal adverse effects (FDA, 2009). As there is no quality
evidence of efficacy and the target tissue is deep, these topical agents are not
recommended for treatment of shoulder pain and rotator cuff tendinopathy.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Agropyron,
Dimethyl Sulfoxide, Acetylcysteine, glyceryl trinitrate; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff
tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis,
subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 19 articles in PubMed, 198 in Scopus, 13 in
CINAHL, 7 in Cochrane Library, 53 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 5 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane
Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 6 articles considered for
inclusion, 1 randomized trials and 3 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

OTHER MEDICATIONS
Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids has been used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies (931933)
. Statins have been used to prevent and treat rotator cuff tendinopathy (933-936).
OMEGA-3-POLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACIDS FOR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
Not Recommended
Omega-3-polyunsaturated fatty acids are not recommended to treat rotator cuff
tendinopathy.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

139

Level of confidence Low
Rationale
One high-quality RCT suggests a lack of efficacy (Sandford et al., 2018). Thus, omega-3polyunsaturated fatty acids are not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Omega-3polyunsaturated fatty acids; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain,
rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial
bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 2 articles in PubMed, 109 in Scopus, 5 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 10 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 2 from
PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Of the 3 articles considered for inclusion, 2 randomized trials and
1 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
STATINS FOR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of statins to treat rotator cuff
tendinopathy.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials of statins for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathy, although
there is evidence that lipid disorders and cardiovascular disease risk factors are risk factors
for rotator cuff tendinopathies. Because there is no quality evidence of efficacy specifically
for the treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies, there is no recommendation regarding this
indication.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

140

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Statins or
Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Reductase Inhibitors; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff
tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis,
subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 6 articles in PubMed, 203 in Scopus, 6 in
CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 4 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. Zero articles
met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

DEVICES
SLINGS, BRACES, AND SHOULDER SUPPORTS
Slings, braces, and shoulder supports have been used to help stabilize the shoulder and
rotator cuff during treatment (937-945). Immobilization has been used to promote healing in
rotator cuff tendinopathies after surgical intervention (946-952).
SLINGS, BRACES, AND SHOULDER SUPPORTS FOR ACUTE SEVERE SHOULDER PAIN AND
ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
Sometimes Recommended
Slings and shoulder supports are selectively recommended for use only for acute severe
pain when the appliance is used to briefly rest the shoulder and then promptly but gradually
advance the activity level. This includes brief, post-operative use of slings and braces. Slings
are not recommended for use in subacute or chronic pain. Longer use may be selectively
indicated for significant trauma and post-operatively, although a range-of-motion program
is still generally indicated.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Acute severe shoulder pain, either traumatic or atraumatic, particularly where the appliance
is utilized as part of a plan to briefly rest the shoulder and promptly, gradually increase
activity level. Non-operative patients are recommended to have a ROM exercise program
instituted in nearly all circumstances. Severe trauma may require more extended use,
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

141

although concomitant range of motion exercises are still generally indicated. Post-operative
use is also an indication and timing of, and institution of concomitant exercises is to be
guided by the treating surgeon with longer use sometimes indicated; however importantly,
one RCT has suggested improved outcomes if rehabilitation of a small- to medium-sized tear
is accomplished without use of a sling (Tirefort et al., 2019).
Benefits
Short-term improvement in pain.
Harms
Delayed recovery, development of adhesive capsulitis and debility.
Indications for discontinuation
Generally should be weaned off within 3-5 days, especially for non-operative patients. Postoperatively, evidence suggests 3 weeks in a simple sling is not inferior to 6 weeks in a
mobilization brace with assessments out to 12 months (Jenssen et al., 2018), and there is
evidence that immobilization results in worse functional outcomes at 6 months (Tirefort et
al., 2019), resulting in some indications to advance exercises earlier rather than later.
Rationale
There are no quality studies for acute shoulder pain. There are several RCTs of postarthroscopic surgery for either small- or medium-sized rotator cuff tears or impingement
syndrome. One trial found no differences between 3 weeks in a sling and 6 weeks in a brace
for small- to medium-sized rotator cuff tears (Jenssen et al., 2018). Another trial found no
differences between early mobilization for 6 weeks with PRN sling use compared with 6
weeks in a sling without active shoulder ROM (Sheps et al., 2019). Another trial suggested
that an abduction brace was not superior to the anti-rotation sling after arthroscopic cuff
repair (Hollman et al., 2017). Another trial found no additive value of sling use for 4 weeks
after arthroscopic repair of small to medium sized tears when added to passive mobilization
of the shoulder for 4 weeks and then progressive mobilization (Tirefort et al., 2019).
Thus, there is not quality evidence that supports use of a sling for either acute pain or postoperative pain. Theoretically, short-term use of slings and supports may help with shortterm pain reductions. However, they come with considerable increased risks of adhesive
capsulitis, delayed recovery and increased debility. Thus, slings and supports are selectively
recommended for only acute severe shoulder pain and short-term post-operative use.
Range-of-motion exercises are generally advised (e.g., pendulum, wall-walks) during the
time when using the sling. Generally wean off the support use within 1-2 weeks.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Slings, Braces,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

142

Shoulder Supports; orthotic devices, orthoses, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear,
shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis,
subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 64 articles in PubMed, 566 in Scopus, 29428 in
CINAHL, 43 in Cochrane Library, 391 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 2 from Cochrane
Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 11 articles considered for
inclusion, 7 randomized trials and 1 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Post- Operative
Immobilization; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 48 articles in PubMed, 1491 in Scopus, 29203 in CINAHL, 7 in
Cochrane Library, 593 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 4 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 5 articles considered for inclusion, 1
randomized trial and 4 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SLINGS AND SHOULDER SUPPORTS FOR SUBACUTE SHOULDER PAIN AND ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHY
Not Recommended
Slings and shoulder supports are not recommended for either subacute or chronic shoulder
pain or for mild to moderate acute pain.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

143

Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is one moderate-quality trial of a sling for treatment of disabling impingement
syndrome, but it failed to find evidence of efficacy (Walther et al., 2004). As there is no
evidence of efficacy in chronic pain patients, and there are considerable adverse effects,
slings and supports are not indicated in subacute or chronic shoulder pain patients.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Slings, Braces,
Shoulder Supports; orthotic devices, orthoses, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear,
shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis,
subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 64 articles in PubMed, 566 in Scopus, 29428 in
CINAHL, 43 in Cochrane Library, 391 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 2 from Cochrane
Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 11 articles considered for
inclusion, 7 randomized trials and 1 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Post- Operative
Immobilization; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 48 articles in PubMed, 1491 in Scopus, 29203 in CINAHL, 7 in
Cochrane Library, 593 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 4 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 5 articles considered for inclusion, 1
randomized trial and 4 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

144

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SLINGS OR SHOULDER SUPPORTS FOR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN AND ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHY
Not Recommended
Slings and shoulder supports are not recommended for either subacute or chronic shoulder
pain or for mild to moderate acute pain.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
There is one moderate-quality trial of a sling for treatment of disabling impingement
syndrome, but it failed to find evidence of efficacy (Walther et al., 2004). As there is no
evidence of efficacy in chronic pain patients, and there are considerable adverse effects,
slings and supports are not indicated in subacute or chronic shoulder pain patients.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Slings, Braces,
Shoulder Supports; orthotic devices, orthoses, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear,
shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis,
subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 64 articles in PubMed, 566 in Scopus, 29428 in
CINAHL, 43 in Cochrane Library, 391 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 2 from Cochrane
Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 11 articles considered for
inclusion, 7 randomized trials and 1 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

145

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Post- Operative
Immobilization; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 48 articles in PubMed, 1491 in Scopus, 29203 in CINAHL, 7 in
Cochrane Library, 593 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 4 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 5 articles considered for inclusion, 1
randomized trial and 4 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

TAPING AND KINESIOTAPING
Taping (non-elastic, thick tape) and kinesiotaping (elastic, thinner tape) are used on the
extremities, particularly in sports settings, as well as the shoulder (953-960). Taping (white
athletic taping, cotton mesh adhesive tape often over gauze) is intended to stabilize and
support, but restrict ROM, and thus is used for purported treatment and preventive
purposes (961-964). It is often utilized immediately prior to an activity and then removed, or
the cotton mesh may be applied and removed after hours of use. Kinesiotaping has also
been used for treatment, including pain relief; however, it is intended to allow full ROM in
contrast with traditional taping (957-971). Kinesiotaping is proprietary; proponents believe the
tape should be applied in specific patterns and may or may not be stretched depending on
the injury. Regardless, all types of taping are utilized to attempt to treat musculoskeletal
disorders. Difficulty with tolerating the various types of tape may be problematic for some
patients.
TAPING OR KINESIOTAPING FOR SHOULDER PAIN AND ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
Not Recommended
Taping or kinesiotaping is not recommended for treatment of shoulder pain and rotator cuff
tendinopathy.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

146

Two sham-controlled trials found lack of efficacy (Kang et al., 2019, Kocyigit et al., 2016). A
post-operative, sham-controlled trial also found lack of efficacy (Reynard et al., 2018). One
high-quality, but very short-term, trial of kinesiotaping for treatment of shoulder pain failed
to show improvements in pain (Thelen et al., 2008). A moderate-quality study reported the
results were related to expectations and psychological conditioning (Analay Akbaba et al.,
2018). Taping and kinesiotaping have sham-controlled evidence of lack of efficacy and thus
they are not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Taping and
Kinesiotaping; athletic tape, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain,
rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial
bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 41 articles in PubMed, 112 in Scopus, 38869 in CINAHL, 27 in
Cochrane Library, 91 in Google Scholar, and 4 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 10 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane Library, 2 from
Google Scholar, and 4 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for inclusion, 18
randomized trials and 5 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETS AND MAGNETIC STIMULATION
High-intensity magnetic stimulation purportedly causes depolarization of nerves and has
been found to result in an antinociceptive effect in rats (972). Electromagnetic fields have
been known to increase osteoblastic activity. Therefore, proponents believe magnetic fields
have therapeutic value in the treatment of musculoskeletal disorders. Magnetic field
therapies have been used to treat various rotator cuff tendinopathies (973-976).
MAGNETS AND MAGNETIC STIMULATION FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC
SHOULDER PAIN OR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
Not Recommended
Magnets and magnetic stimulation are not recommended for the treatment of acute,
subacute, or chronic shoulder pain or rotator cuff tendinopathy.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

147

Level of confidence Low
Rationale
One trial assessing additive value of EMTT to EWST reported evidence of efficacy (Klüter et
al., 2018). However, another sham-controlled trial reported a lack of efficacy (de Freitas et
al., 2014). A third trial found evidence pulsed electromagnetic fields had efficacy (Binder et
al., 1984). There also is quality evidence for lack of efficacy of magnets in treatment of low
back pain (Collacott et al., 2000). Magnets and magnetic fields are not invasive and have no
adverse effects; they are low to high cost depending on the type of treatment. Because the
data substantially conflict and the underlying theory is problematic, they are not
recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Magnets,
Magnetic Therapy, Magnetic Field Therapies; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear,
shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis,
subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 15 articles in PubMed, 246 in Scopus, 7 in
CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 483 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 2 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane
Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 4 articles considered for
inclusion, 3 randomized trials and 1 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

VIBRATION
Vibration has been used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies (286,977-981).
VIBRATION FOR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
Not Recommended
Vibration is not recommended for the treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathy.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

148

Rationale
The only moderate-quality RCTs assessing vibration suggest a lack of efficacy (Lam et al.,
2015, Hand et al., 2009), and thus vibration is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Vibration; rotator
cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 19 articles in
PubMed, 2460 in Scopus, 13 in CINAHL, 460 in Cochrane Library, 117 in Google Scholar, and
0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 4 from Scopus, 1 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 6
articles considered for inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 2 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ELECTRICAL THERAPIES
INTERFERENTIAL THERAPY
There are multiple forms of electrical therapies used to treat musculoskeletal pain. These
include high-voltage galvanic, H-wave® Device Stimulation, interferential therapy (IFT or IT),
iontophoresis, microcurrent, percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (PENS), sympathetic
electrotherapy, and transcutaneous electrical stimulation (TENS). The mechanism(s) of
action, if any, are unclear.
INTERFERENTIAL THERAPY FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN OR
ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Interferential therapy is not recommended for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

149

Rationale
There are moderate-quality study suggesting interferential therapy is ineffective for treating
rotator cuff tendinopathies (Gunay Ucurum et al., 2018, Gomes et al., 2018, Van der Heijden
et al., 1999), two of which suggested a lack of additive benefit (Gunay Ucurum et al., 2018,
Gomes et al., 2018). Only one RCT suggested efficacy (Montes-Molina et al., 2012). Thus, the
overall literature base suggests a lack of efficacy and interferential is not recommended for
treatment of shoulder pain or rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Interferential
Therapy, IFC, Electrical Stimulation; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder
pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial
bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 25 articles in PubMed, 200 in Scopus, 13 in CINAHL, 20 in Cochrane
Library, 84 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 5 from
PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar,
and 1 from other sources. Of the 10 articles considered for inclusion, 5 randomized trials
and 1 systematic review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

EXTRACORPOREAL SHOCKWAVE THERAPY
Extracorporeal shockwave therapy (ESWT) has been utilized for treatment of shoulder
tendinitis (756,982-984) but has been particularly used for calcific tendinitis (983-992). Calcific
tendinitis should be diagnosed with imaging for confirmation of presence of calcium.
However, there have been some challenges noted in interpreting studies of efficacy
including amount of energy delivered, method of focusing shock waves, treatment
frequency, timing, and use of anesthetics (975,988,992-1014).
EXTRACORPOREAL SHOCKWAVE THERAPY FOR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN OR NONCALCIFIC ROTATOR CUFF TENDINITIS
Not Recommended
Extracorporeal shockwave therapy is not recommended for treatment of acute, subacute, or
chronic non-calcific rotator cuff tendinitis.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

150

Strength of evidence Moderately Not Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
There are five moderate-quality trials evaluating efficacy of ESWT for treatment of patients
with chronic, non-calcific tendinitis or impingement syndrome (Kvalvaag, 2017, Schmitt et
al., 2001, Speed et al., 2002, Schofer et al., 2009, Galasso et al., 2012, Engebretsen et al.,
2011). Five of the six studies suggest a lack of efficacy (Kvalvaag, 2017, Schmitt et al., 2001,
Speed, 2004, Schofer et al., 2009, Engebretsen et al., 2011), while two smaller studies have
suggested efficacy (Santamato A, 2016, Galasso et al., 2012). There are other treatments
reviewed elsewhere with documented efficacy for treatment of these patients. ESWT is
minimally invasive as often performed with an injected anesthetic, has some adverse
effects, is moderate to high cost depending on numbers of treatments, and appears
ineffective. Thus, with evidence of inefficacy accruing, it is not recommended for treatment
of non-calcific rotator cuff tendinitis.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Extracorporeal
Shockwave Therapy; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 14 articles in PubMed, 592 in Scopus, 28957 in CINAHL, 62 in
Cochrane Library, 338 in Google Scholar, and 29 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 4 from PubMed, 5 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 5 from Cochrane Library, 3 from
Google Scholar, and 29 from other sources. Of the 46 articles considered for inclusion, 33
randomized trials and 13 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
EXTRACORPOREAL SHOCKWAVE THERAPY FOR ACUTE OR SUBACUTE SHOULDER PAIN OR
NON-CALCIFIC ROTATOR CUFF TENDINITIS
Not Recommended
Extracorporeal shockwave therapy is not recommended for treatment of acute, subacute, or
chronic non-calcific rotator cuff tendinitis.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

151

Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
There are five moderate-quality trials evaluating efficacy of ESWT for treatment of patients
with chronic, non-calcific tendinitis or impingement syndrome (Kvalvaag, 2017, Schmitt et
al., 2001, Speed et al., 2002, Schofer et al., 2009, Galasso et al., 2012, Engebretsen et al.,
2011). Five of the six studies suggest a lack of efficacy (Kvalvaag, 2017, Schmitt et al., 2001,
Speed, 2004, Schofer et al., 2009, Engebretsen et al., 2011), while two smaller studies have
suggested efficacy (Santamato A, 2016, Galasso et al., 2012). There are other treatments
reviewed elsewhere with documented efficacy for treatment of these patients. ESWT is
minimally invasive as often performed with an injected anesthetic, has some adverse
effects, is moderate to high cost depending on numbers of treatments, and appears
ineffective. Thus, with evidence of inefficacy accruing, it is not recommended for treatment
of non-calcific rotator cuff tendinitis.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Extracorporeal
Shockwave Therapy; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 14 articles in PubMed, 592 in Scopus, 28957 in CINAHL, 62 in
Cochrane Library, 338 in Google Scholar, and 29 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 4 from PubMed, 5 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 5 from Cochrane Library, 3 from
Google Scholar, and 29 from other sources. Of the 46 articles considered for inclusion, 33
randomized trials and 13 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
EXTRACORPOREAL SHOCKWAVE THERAPY FOR CALCIFIC ROTATOR CUFF TENDINITIS
Recommended
Extracorporeal shockwave therapy is strongly recommended for treatment of chronic
calcific rotator cuff tendinitis.
Strength of evidence Strongly Recommended, Evidence (A)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

152

Level of confidence High
Indications
Symptomatic calcific rotator cuff tendinitis that has been diagnosed with imaging. Patients
should have failed at least 3 months of time with symptoms without resolution as well as
failed physical or occupational therapy with both active and passive exercises, NSAIDs, and
glucocorticosteroid injection(s) (Gerdesmeyer et al., 2003, Peters et al., 2004, Albert et al.,
2007, Hsu et al., 2008, Hearnden, 2009, Pleiner et al., 2004, Cacchio, 2006, Sabeti et al.,
2007). Evidence also suggests ultrasound-guided needling appears superior to EWST for
calcium deposit resolution (Louwerens et al., 2020, Kim et al., 2014, Del Castillo et al., 2016),
and 2 of the 3 studies also suggest it is also superior for pain and/or function (Kim et al.,
2014, Del Castillo et al., 2016). Thus, there is consideration for that procedure prior to
consideration of ESWT. Should a patient fail those interventions ahead of 3-6 months, then
ESWT may be an option.
Benefits
Improved pain, function, and disappearance of calcium deposits.
Harms
Short-term pain.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Treatment frequency and duration patterns varied in quality studies. These ranged from a
single session (Hearnden, 2009, Sabeti et al., 2007, Krasny et al., 2005) to a second session
in 1 week (Haake et al., 2002) to weekly sessions for 4 weeks (Cacchio, 2006) to an average
of 4 sessions every 6 weeks over 6 months (Peters et al., 2004). Most commonly and
including the highest quality studies, patients were treated with 2 sessions that were
approximately 14 days apart. (Gerdesmeyer et al., 2003, Albert et al., 2007, Hsu et al., 2008,
Pleiner et al., 2004, Pan et al., 2003). Thus, up to 2 sessions, approximately 2 weeks apart
are recommended. Energy levels with documented success varied as well, ranging from 0.
28 to 0. 55 mJ/mm2 in the most successful quality sham-controlled trials (Gerdesmeyer et
al., 2003, Peters et al., 2004, Albert et al., 2007, Hsu et al., 2008, Hearnden, 2009, Pleiner et
al., 2004). There is evidence that low energy levels such as 0. 15 mJ/mm2 are less effective
(Peters et al., 2004). Thus, while an optimal dose is unclear, the recommended dose ranges
from 0. 28 to 0. 55 mJ/mm2. There is evidence that positioning of the arm in hyperextension
and internal rotation is superior (Tornese et al., 2011). There is quality evidence the focus
should be on the calcium deposits and not the tendon insertion (Haake et al., 2002). Some
protocols combined this therapy with an exercise program.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution, intolerance, non-compliance.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

153

Rationale
There are three high-quality (Gerdesmeyer et al., 2003, Peters et al., 2004, Cacchio, 2006)
and seven moderate-quality trials (Albert et al., 2007, Hsu et al., 2008, Hearnden, 2009,
Pleiner et al., 2004, Sabeti et al., 2007, Kolk et al., 2013, Ioppolo et al., 2012) comparing
extracorporeal shockwave therapy with either sham or low energy for treatment of chronic
calcific tendinitis. The quality literature nearly uniformly supports efficacy of ESWT for
treatment of calcific tendinitis whether measured by pain, function, or disappearance of
calcium deposits on x-rays (Gerdesmeyer et al., 2003, Peters et al., 2004, Albert et al., 2007,
Hsu et al., 2008, Hearnden, 2009, Pleiner et al., 2004, Cacchio, 2006, Sabeti et al., 2007).
There also is evidence of efficacy compared with treatment with TENS (Pan et al., 2003).
There is a low-quality study suggesting that surgical extirpation of calcium deposits is
equally effective compared with ESWT (Rompe et al., 2001). Needling is sometimes used as
an adjunct, has some evidence of efficacy, and is reviewed elsewhere (Krasny et al., 2005).
There are no RCTs comparing ESWT with ultrasound-guided needling, which makes a direct
comparison and recommendation between these treatments difficult (Louwerens et al.,
2014). ESWT is minimally invasive (Louwerens et al., 2014), as it is often performed with an
injected anesthetic, has some adverse effects, is moderate to high cost depending on the
number of treatments yet is quite effective. Thus, it is strongly recommended for treatment
of calcific rotator cuff tendinitis.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Extracorporeal
Shockwave Therapy; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 14 articles in PubMed, 592 in Scopus, 28957 in CINAHL, 62 in
Cochrane Library, 338 in Google Scholar, and 29 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 4 from PubMed, 5 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 5 from Cochrane Library, 3 from
Google Scholar, and 29 from other sources. Of the 46 articles considered for inclusion, 33
randomized trials and 13 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

PULSED ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD THERAPY
Pulsed electromagnetic field therapy (PEMF) is used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies
(831,834,973-976,1015-1019)
.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

154

PULSED ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN
OR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Pulsed electromagnetic field (PEMF) is moderately not recommended for treatment of
acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain or rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Moderately Not Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
There are two quality studies of PEMF suggesting lack of benefit, which include a highquality sham-controlled trial (Aktas I, 2007). Thus, treatment with pulsed electromagnetic
fields is not recommended for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Pulsed
Electromagnetic Field Therapy, Pulsed Electromagnetic Field, PEFT, Low Field Magnetic
Stimulation; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries,
shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus
tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed
20 articles in PubMed, 188 in Scopus, 11 in CINAHL, 16 in Cochrane Library, 75 in Google
Scholar, and 7 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 3 from PubMed, 0 from
Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 7 from other
sources. Of the 11 articles considered for inclusion, 3 randomized trials and 3 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

155

ELECTRICAL MUSCLE STIMULATION
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation has been used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathy (1020).
ELECTRICAL MUSCLE STIMULATION (EMS) FOR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for electrical muscle stimulation for treatment of rotator cuff
tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials and thus there is no recommendation for electrical muscle
stimulation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Electrical Muscle
Stimulation, Neuromuscular Electrical Stimulation; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff
tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis,
subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 54 articles in PubMed, 5,702 in Scopus, 178 in
CINAHL, 14 in Cochrane Library, 233 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 1 article considered for
inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

156

TRANSCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) has been used to treat rotator cuff
injuries (29,31-39,51569-572).
TRANSCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION FOR TREATMENT OF ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHIES
Sometimes Recommended
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) is selectively recommended for chronic
rotator cuff tendinopathies and post-operative use as an adjunct for pain control.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Moderate to severe and chronic rotator cuff tendinopathies that have been insufficiently
addressed by exercises, NSAIDs, and injection. Post-operative use has been suggested to
reduce pain and opioids consumption (Mahure et al., 2017).
Benefits
Improved pain control. Reduced post-operative opioids use.
Harms
Negligible. Possible externalization and medicalization away from an active rehabilitation
program.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Use 3-5 times/day is typical.
Indications for discontinuation
Sufficient recovery, intolerance, and non-compliance.
Rationale
A post-operative sham-controlled study suggested TENS reduced pain and opioids use
compared with sham (Mahure et al., 2017). A comparative trial suggested superiority of
electroacupuncture to TENS (Yoshimizu, 2012). One RCT found transcutaneous pulsed
radiofrequency (TPRF) superior to TENS (Lin et al., 2019). One RCT suggested potential
evidence of efficacy based on functional MRI but no clinical outcomes (Kocyigit, 2012). TENS
is non-invasive, has low adverse effects, but is moderate to high cost when examined in
aggregate. As there is evidence suggesting efficacy, particularly in the post-operative
setting, TENS is selectively recommended.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

157

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Transcutaneous
Electrical Stimulation, TENS; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain,
rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial
bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 54 articles in PubMed, 662 in Scopus, 88 in CINAHL, 32 in Cochrane
Library, 246 in Google Scholar, and 6 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 7
from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 6 from other sources. Of the 15 articles considered for inclusion, 8 randomized
trials and 2 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MICROCURRENT
Microcurrent has been used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies (1021,1022).
MICROCURRENT FOR TREATMENT OF ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Sometimes Recommended
Microcurrent is selectively recommended for chronic rotator cuff tendinopathies and postoperative use.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Moderate to severe and chronic rotator cuff tendinopathies that have been insufficiently
addressed by exercises, NSAIDs, and injections.
Benefits
Improved pain control.
Harms

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

158

Negligible. Possible externalization and medicalization away from an active rehabilitation
program.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Approximately 1-3 appointments per week in therapy up to 4-6 weeks. Subsequent batches
of 4-6 appointments should be based on incremental functional gain.
Indications for discontinuation
Sufficient recovery, intolerance, and non-compliance.
Rationale
One RCT suggested efficacy (Atya, 2012) and a second suggested comparable efficacy with
TENS (Vrouva, 2019). Microcurrent is non-invasive, has low adverse effects, but is moderate
to high cost when examined in aggregate. As there is evidence suggesting efficacy,
microcurrent is selectively recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Microcurrent;
microcurrent therapy, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator
cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 2 articles in PubMed, 154 in Scopus, 2 in CINAHL, 2 in Cochrane
Library, 10 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from
PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Of the 2 articles considered for inclusion, 2 randomized trials and
0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

OTHER ELECTRICAL STIMULATION THERAPIES
Iontophoresis was used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies (1023,1024). H-wave® Device
Stimulation has been used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies (982,1025,1026). High-voltage
galvanic stimulation provides pain relief and facilitates in wound healing by the use of high
driving voltage up to 500 volts (1027,1028). Percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (PENS) is

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

159

an analgesic modality used to treat conditions such as low back pain and diabetic
neuropathy (1029-1031).
HIGH-VOLTAGE GALVANIC STIMULATION FOR THE TREATMENT OF ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of other electrical therapies outside of
research settings for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies, including high-voltage
galvanic, H-wave® Device Stimulation, iontophoresis, percutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (PENS), and sympathetic electrotherapy.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
One trial of H-wave® Device Stimulation with invasive electrodes in post-operative rotator
cuff tendinopathy patients suggested some modest range-of-motion benefits, but
applicability to surface electrodes or to other patients is unknown and further large scale
studies were recommended (Blum et al., 2009). The two available RCTs regarding
iontophoresis do not clearly suggest efficacy (García, 2016, Leduc, 2003). There are no
quality studies for any of the other electrical therapies in occupational populations with
rotator cuff tendinopathies. These therapies are mostly non-invasive with low adverse
effects, but are moderate to high cost when examined in aggregate. There is no
recommendation for or against use of these therapies (high-voltage galvanic, H-wave®
Device Stimulation, iontophoresis, percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, and
sympathetic electrotherapy). There are alternate treatments that are effective.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: High-Voltage
Galvanic Stimulation; high-voltage galvanic pulsed stimulation, high-voltage galvanism,
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0 articles in
PubMed, 32 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 38 in Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL,
0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

160

review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
H-WAVE® DEVICE STIMULATION FOR THE TREATMENT OF ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of other electrical therapies outside of
research settings for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies, including high-voltage
galvanic, H-wave® Device Stimulation, iontophoresis, percutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (PENS), and sympathetic electrotherapy.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
One trial of H-wave® Device Stimulation with invasive electrodes in post-operative rotator
cuff tendinopathy patients suggested some modest range-of-motion benefits, but
applicability to surface electrodes or to other patients is unknown and further large scale
studies were recommended (Blum et al., 2009). The two available RCTs regarding
iontophoresis do not clearly suggest efficacy (García, 2016, Leduc, 2003). There are no
quality studies for any of the other electrical therapies in occupational populations with
rotator cuff tendinopathies. These therapies are mostly non-invasive with low adverse
effects, but are moderate to high cost when examined in aggregate. There is no
recommendation for or against use of these therapies (high-voltage galvanic, H-wave®
Device Stimulation, iontophoresis, percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, and
sympathetic electrotherapy). There are alternate treatments that are effective.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms H-Wave
Stimulation, H-Wave, HWSD; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain,
rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial
bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 2 articles in PubMed, 7 in Scopus, 2 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane
Library, 4 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from
PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar,
and 1 from other sources. Of the 3 articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 1
systematic review met the inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

161

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
IONTOPHORESIS FOR THE TREATMENT OF ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of other electrical therapies outside of
research settings for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies, including high-voltage
galvanic, H-wave® Device Stimulation, iontophoresis, percutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (PENS), and sympathetic electrotherapy.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
One trial of H-wave® Device Stimulation with invasive electrodes in post-operative rotator
cuff tendinopathy patients suggested some modest range-of-motion benefits, but
applicability to surface electrodes or to other patients is unknown and further large scale
studies were recommended (Blum et al., 2009). The two available RCTs regarding
iontophoresis do not clearly suggest efficacy (García, 2016, Leduc, 2003). There are no
quality studies for any of the other electrical therapies in occupational populations with
rotator cuff tendinopathies. These therapies are mostly non-invasive with low adverse
effects, but are moderate to high cost when examined in aggregate. There is no
recommendation for or against use of these therapies (high-voltage galvanic, H-wave®
Device Stimulation, iontophoresis, percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, and
sympathetic electrotherapy). There are alternate treatments that are effective.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Iontophoresis;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 15 articles in
PubMed, 659 in Scopus, 8 in CINAHL, 2 in Cochrane Library, 176 in Google Scholar, and 1
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 1 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 2
articles considered for inclusion, 3 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

162

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PERCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION (PENS) FOR THE TREATMENT OF
ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of other electrical therapies outside of
research settings for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies, including high-voltage
galvanic, H-wave® Device Stimulation, iontophoresis, percutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (PENS), and sympathetic electrotherapy.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
One trial of H-wave® Device Stimulation with invasive electrodes in post-operative rotator
cuff tendinopathy patients suggested some modest range-of-motion benefits, but
applicability to surface electrodes or to other patients is unknown and further large scale
studies were recommended (Blum et al., 2009). The two available RCTs regarding
iontophoresis do not clearly suggest efficacy (García, 2016, Leduc, 2003). There are no
quality studies for any of the other electrical therapies in occupational populations with
rotator cuff tendinopathies. These therapies are mostly non-invasive with low adverse
effects, but are moderate to high cost when examined in aggregate. There is no
recommendation for or against use of these therapies (high-voltage galvanic, H-wave®
Device Stimulation, iontophoresis, percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, and
sympathetic electrotherapy). There are alternate treatments that are effective.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Percutaneous
Electrical Nerve Stimulation; PENS, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder
pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial
bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 58 articles in PubMed, 870 in Scopus, 35 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 3 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

163

PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Sympathetic
Electrotherapy, Sympathetic Therapy, Sympathetic Electrical Stimulation Therapy; rotator
cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 6 articles in
PubMed, 36 in Scopus, 51 in CINAHL, 5 in Cochrane Library, 222 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero
articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SYMPATHETIC ELECTROTHERAPY FOR THE TREATMENT OF ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of other electrical therapies outside of
research settings for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies, including high-voltage
galvanic, H-wave® Device Stimulation, iontophoresis, percutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (PENS), and sympathetic electrotherapy.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

164

One trial of H-wave® Device Stimulation with invasive electrodes in post-operative rotator
cuff tendinopathy patients suggested some modest range-of-motion benefits, but
applicability to surface electrodes or to other patients is unknown and further large scale
studies were recommended (Blum et al., 2009). The two available RCTs regarding
iontophoresis do not clearly suggest efficacy (García, 2016, Leduc, 2003). There are no
quality studies for any of the other electrical therapies in occupational populations with
rotator cuff tendinopathies. These therapies are mostly non-invasive with low adverse
effects, but are moderate to high cost when examined in aggregate. There is no
recommendation for or against use of these therapies (high-voltage galvanic, H-wave®
Device Stimulation, iontophoresis, percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, and
sympathetic electrotherapy). There are alternate treatments that are effective.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Sympathetic
Electrotherapy, Sympathetic Therapy, Sympathetic Electrical Stimulation Therapy; rotator
cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 6 articles in
PubMed, 36 in Scopus, 51 in CINAHL, 5 in Cochrane Library, 222 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero
articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

INJECTION THERAPIES
SUBACROMIAL KETOROLAC INJECTIONS
SUBACROMIAL KETOROLAC INJECTIONS FOR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Subacromial ketalorac injections are moderately recommended for treatment of acute,
subacute and chronic rotator cuff tendinopathies (including rotator cuff tendinoses,
supraspinatus tendinitis, impingement syndrome, and subacromial bursitis).
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

165

Indications
Moderate to severe pain from rotator cuff tendinopathies that control with NSAID(s) or
acetaminophen is unsatisfactory (Adebajo et al., 1990, Petri et al., 1987, Blair et al., 1996,
Akgun et al., 2004, Plafki et al., 2000).
Benefits
Improved or resolved pain. When combined with anesthetic (e.g., bupivacaine), these
injections also have significant diagnostic benefit if evaluated a few minutes after the
injection.
Harms
Negligible other than potential for an allergic reaction and/or risks typical of any injection.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Trials have used ketorolac 30mg and 60mg. Most have used co-administration of an
anesthetic medication, which is advised to help assist with both accuracy of placement
(anesthesia) and diagnosis (post-anesthetic findings). A second injection after waiting at
least 2 weeks may be reasonable if the response is suboptimal or the subacromial space was
felt to have not been accessed, though it would be appropriate to consider a different
technique or imaging (Kakar et al., 2007).
Indications for discontinuation
If there has not been a response to a first injection, there is generally less indication for a
second, particularly if there was anesthesia achieved with the injection, but no durable
improvement in pain and function. If there is reason to believe the medication was not well
placed (e.g., no post-injection anesthesia from the anesthetic) and/or if the underlying
condition is so severe that one injection could not be expected to adequately treat the
condition yet there is unlikely to be a complete rotator cuff tear, a second injection may be
indicated. The (first or) second injection may be performed under ultrasound guidance for
increased accuracy, if available, as there is some evidence suggesting superior placement
with ultrasound guidance (Naredo et al., 2004, Chen et al., 2006, Ucuncu et al., 2009). Yet,
while ultrasound has been used in some studies (de Witte et al., 2013, Ekeberg et al., 2009,
Plafki et al., 2000, Chavez-Lopez et al., 2009), there is little evidence to suggest outcomes
superiority associated with using ultrasound for administration. Additional injections are
also not generally indicated if the plan is for surgery (Puzzitiello et al., 2020).
Rationale
There are multiple moderate-quality trials that compared subacromial glucocorticosteroid
which suggest equivalency with glucocorticosteroid injection without an adverse effects
profile which for steroids may include worsening operative prognoses (Min et al., 2013,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

166

Goyal, 2022, Kim, 2021, Abolhasani, 2019, Siddique, 2021, Taheri, 2017, Akgun et al., 2004).
Ketorolac injections are minimally invasive, have low adverse effects, are moderate costs
and have evidence of efficacy and thus are recommended for treatment of rotator cuff
tendinopathy.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Subacromial
Glucocorticosteroid Injections; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain,
rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial
bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 148 articles in PubMed, 2140 in Scopus, 65 in CINAHL, 63 in
Cochrane Library, 159 in Google Scholar, and 37 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 0from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 37 from other sources. Of the 40 articles considered for inclusion, 39
randomized trials and 1 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SUBACROMIAL GLUCOCORTICOSTEROID INJECTIONS
Several types of glucocorticoid injections have been used to treat patients with rotator cuff
tendinopathies. Viscosupplementation, prolotherapy, growth hormone, and botulinum
injections have also been utilized.
Glucocorticosteroids are widely used for treatment of rotator cuff-related disorders
(96,871,1032-1037)
. These injections deliver medication to the subacromial bursa, rotator cuff and
surrounding tissue with minimal systemic effects (871,1032,1033,1038).
SUBACROMIAL GLUCOCORTICOSTEROID INJECTIONS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC
ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Subacromial glucocorticosteroid injections are moderately recommended for treatment of
acute, subacute and chronic rotator cuff tendinopathies (including rotator cuff tendinoses,
supraspinatus tendinitis, impingement syndrome, and subacromial bursitis).
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

167

Indications
Moderate to severe pain from rotator cuff tendinopathies that control with NSAID(s) or
acetaminophen is unsatisfactory (Adebajo et al., 1990, Petri et al., 1987, Blair et al., 1996,
Akgun et al., 2004, Plafki et al., 2000). Generally, subacromial ketorolac is preferred due to
lower adverse effects profile and data suggesting at least equivalency (see Subacromial
Ketorolac Injections).
Caution is indicated among those who are thought to need surgery as injection has been
associated with approximate doubling of the risk of infection and failure of rotator cuff
repair (Puzzitiello et al., 2020).
Benefits
Improved or resolved pain.
Harms
Steroid flare after an injection; rare infection. Potential for worse results if surgery is
subsequently performed (Puzzitiello et al., 2020).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Single injection should be scheduled and results evaluated, rather than scheduling a series
of injections. A second injection after waiting at least 2 weeks may be reasonable if the
response is suboptimal or the subacromial space was felt to have not been accessed, though
it would be appropriate to consider a different technique or imaging (Naredo et al., 2004).
Sometimes these injections are performed without glucocorticosteroid for diagnostic
purposes (Mair et al., 2004). In most cases, glucocorticoid is added to local anesthetic for
diagnostic confirmation and treatment with 1 injection. Multiple doses have been utilized
with only one head-to-head comparative trial that suggested no differences (Chavez-Lopez
et al., 2009). Medication doses used in the successful RCTs included triamcinolone 40mg to
80mg (Blair et al., 1996, Adebajo et al., 1990, Petri et al., 1987, White et al., 1986),
betamethasone 6mg (Alvarez et al., 2005), and methylprednisolone 40mg to 80mg
(Withrington et al., 1985, McInerney et al., 2003). It appears important that the negative
trials tended to utilize smaller doses of steroid, such as triamcinolone 20mg (Ekeberg et al.,
2009) or methylprednisolone 40mg (Vecchio et al., 1993). Nearly all combined the
corticosteroid with variable doses of anesthetic, generally ranging from 2 to 10mL of
lidocaine or bupivacaine (see evidence table). There are no head-to-head comparisons in
quality studies of different medications to ascertain the optimum medication(s) or doses.
Indications for discontinuation
A second glucocorticosteroid injection is not recommended if the first injection has resulted
in significant reduction or resolution of symptoms. If there has not been a response to a first
injection, there is generally less indication for a second, particularly if there was anesthesia
achieved with the injection, but no durable improvement in pain and function which may

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

168

result in a consideration for surgery. If there is reason to believe the medication was not
well placed (e.g., no post-injection anesthesia from the anesthetic) and/or if the underlying
condition is so severe that one steroid bolus could not be expected to adequately treat the
condition, a second injection may be indicated. The (first or) second injection may be
performed under ultrasound guidance for increased accuracy, if available, as there is some
evidence suggesting superior placement with ultrasound guidance (Naredo et al., 2004,
Chen et al., 2006, Ucuncu et al., 2009). Yet, while ultrasound has been used in some studies
(de Witte et al., 2013, Ekeberg et al., 2009, Plafki et al., 2000, Chavez-Lopez et al., 2009),
there is little evidence to suggest outcomes superiority associated with using ultrasound for
administration. Additional injections are also not generally indicated if the plan is for surgery
(Puzzitiello et al., 2020).
Rationale
There are two high- and seven moderate-quality trials that compared subacromial
glucocorticosteroid injection with saline of anesthetic placebos (Adebajo et al., 1990, Petri
et al., 1987, Blair et al., 1996, Akgun et al., 2004, Plafki et al., 2000, Alvarez et al., 2005,
Withrington et al., 1985, McInerney et al., 2003, Vecchio et al., 1993). Patients assessed
included acute (Adebajo et al., 1990, Petri et al., 1987, McInerney et al., 2003), subacute
(Adebajo et al., 1990, Petri et al., 1987, Blair et al., 1996, Withrington et al., 1985, Vecchio et
al., 1993), and chronic rotator cuff tendinopathies (Petri et al., 1987, Blair et al., 1996, Akgun
et al., 2004, Plafki et al., 2000, Alvarez et al., 2005, Withrington et al., 1985). All patient
groups appeared to benefit without a clear pattern of response based on duration of
symptoms with one exception. One trial of acute post-traumatic pain did not find benefit
from these injections (McInerney et al., 2003), likely reflecting the excellent natural
recovery from acute traumatic pain.
Most, but not all, studies showed benefits. It may not be coincidental that the high-quality
study that was negative also utilized the lowest dose of 20mg triamcinolone in chronic
shoulder pain patients (Ekeberg et al., 2009). Another of the negative studies also utilized a
lower dose of steroid (Vecchio et al., 1993), while the last of the negative studies had the
smallest sample size (Withrington et al., 1985). One trial was stopped due to the lack of
efficacy of the placebo arm, while the corticosteroid arm was documenting benefits (Plafki
et al., 2000). Thus, quality evidence documents efficacy of these injections. There also are
two high-quality trials with injected NSAIDs, but they conflict regarding superiority
(Karthikeyan, 2010, Min et al., 2013), resulting in no evidence-based recommendation on
that approach and a need for further investigations. One moderate-quality study (Naredo et
al., 2004) and one low-quality study (Chen et al., 2006) demonstrated increased efficacy,
improved shoulder symptoms, of steroids injected under ultrasonic guidance. However, the
studies discussed above that compared steroid injection with placebo did not use
ultrasound guidance and still resulted in good outcomes.
A Cochrane review similarly concluded there is benefit compared with placebo for
treatment of rotator cuff disease, but no significant benefit of injection compared with
NSAID when pooling three studies (Buchbinder et al., 2004). Approaches utilized include
anterior, anteromedial, lateral and posterior. A cadaveric study found no differences in
accuracy for anteriolateral versus posterior approaches (Mathews et al., 2005).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

169

Another utility of these injections is to predict surgical success. The impingement test with
subacromial anesthetic injection was reported to result in 88% positive predictive value of
surgical success vs. 60% in those negative, (Mair et al., 2004, Oh et al., 2010); thus, another
rationale for injection includes prognosis.
These infections are not without risk as there is an approximate doubling of the risks of both
infection and re-tear of a cuff repair if surgery is subsequently performed especially within 6
months of the injection (Puzzitiello et al., 2020).
Subacromial glucocorticosteroid injections are invasive, typically have a low risk of adverse
effects and are moderately costly. They have the potential to briefly increase blood glucose,
thus monitoring will be appropriate in some diabetic patients. They are effective; most
comparative trials against NSAIDs have found these injections are superior (Adebajo et al.,
1990, Petri et al., 1987); thus, these injections are recommended for management of these
patients. Most should generally have failed prior treatment with NSAIDs and exercise.
Patients who are anticipated to require rotator cuff repair within 6 months are generally
poor candidates due to the potential to re-tear after repair (Puzzitiello et al., 2020).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Subacromial
Glucocorticosteroid Injections; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain,
rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial
bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 148 articles in PubMed, 2140 in Scopus, 65 in CINAHL, 63 in
Cochrane Library, 159 in Google Scholar, and 37 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 0from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 37 from other sources. Of the 40 articles considered for inclusion, 39
randomized trials and 1 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SUBACROMIAL EDTA MESOTHERAPY
Calcium disodium EDTA is a powerful chelator traditionally used to treat lead poisoning,
although it also chelates other divalent cations. Subacromial EDTA injections and
mesotherapy have been used to attempt to treat calcific tendinitis that has been
unresponsive to other treatments (1039).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

170

SUBACROMIAL EDTA MESOTHERAPY INJECTIONS FOR SHOULDER CALCIFIC TENDINITIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of subacromial EDTA mesotherapy for
treatment of shoulder calcific tendinitis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is one moderate-quality trial with 2 active interventions with placebo, comparing
EDTA plus ultrasound versus placebo plus sham ultrasound suggesting reductions in all
measures including pain, motion, Constant Murley scores, and calcifications (Cacchio, 2009).
Thus, there is evidence suggesting potential efficacy of EDTA instilled for calcific tendinitis
with duration of improvement documented at 1 year. EDTA has some risk of serious renal
effects, although there was no increase in serum creatinine and BUN in this trial. The
treatments are high cost, invasive, and require multiple treatments; there is no
recommendation for this treatment as there is no evidence the results of the single trial
were due to EDTA rather than ultrasound.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms:
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, EDTA, Subacromial EDTA Mesotherapy; rotator cuff
tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement
syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic
review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 3 articles in PubMed, 6
in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 5 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 2 articles
considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

VISCOSUPPLEMENTATION INJECTIONS

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

171

Viscosupplementation injections have been used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies and
impingement syndrome (884,1040-1050).
SUBACROMIAL VISCOSUPPLEMENTATION INJECTIONS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR
CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN OR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of subacromial viscosupplementation
injections for the treatment of shoulder pain and rotator cuff tendinopathies (including
rotator cuff tendinoses, supraspinatus tendinitis, impingement syndrome, and subacromial
bursitis).
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
One placebo-controlled trial reported modestly superior outcomes with
viscosupplementation (Chou, 2010). Other trials reported faster resolution with
glucocorticoid injection (Penning et al., 2014) or comparable efficacy (Kim et al., 2012). One
trial reported improved results for adjunctive use of viscosupplementation to physical
therapy exercises (Flores, 2017). There is one low-quality trial without a placebo-control
suggesting few differences between hyaluronate injections and local modalities (Sengul et
al., 2008). The literature is sparse and somewhat conflicting; thus, there is no
recommendation for or against these injections for rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms:
Viscosupplementation Injections, Hyaluronic Acid Injections; rotator cuff tendinopathy,
rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome,
calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 33 articles in PubMed, 854 in
Scopus, 8 in CINAHL, 23 in Cochrane Library, 47 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 6 from PubMed, 3 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 1
from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 13 articles
considered for inclusion, 5 randomized trials and 7 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

172

we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

PLATELET-RICH PLASMA INJECTIONS
PLATELET-RICH PLASMA INJECTIONS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC SHOULDER
PAIN OR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against subacromial platelet-rich plasma (PRP) injections
for the treatment of shoulder pain and rotator cuff tendinopathies (including rotator cuff
tendinoses, supraspinatus tendinitis, impingement syndrome, and subacromial bursitis).

[58.33% panel agreement on No Recommendation. 8.33% agreed with Recommended and
33.33% agreed with Not Recommended. ]
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Studies substantially conflict regarding efficacy of PRP injections for the shoulder.
Systematic reviews and metanalyses have also reported conflicting results, although most
report a lack of short- to intermediate-term benefits (Hamid, 2021, Lin, 2020, Hurley et al.,
2019, Zhu, 2020, Li, 2022); if there are benefits, the average magnitude is not large. There
also appears to be no benefit compared with glucocorticoid injection (Adra, 2023) or
exercise therapy (Hurley et al., 2019). Results assessing objective measures of improvement
are weak. There are increasing numbers of studies suggesting a potential for reduced retear
rates after surgical repairs associated with PRP (Cavendish et al., 2020). One trial had worse
baseline data in the PRP group, likely biasing in favor of more change in that group, and
nevertheless concluded there was comparable efficacy with steroid injection (Dadgostar,
2021).
Most studies reported a lack of additive benefit of PRP injections for surgical repairs (Snow
et al., 2019, Malavolta et al., 2014, Malavolta et al., 2018, Ruiz-Moneo et al., 2013, Wang et
al., 2015, Ebert et al., 2017, Carr et al., 2015, Verhaegen et al., 2016), while a few trials
reported efficacy, especially for re-tear rates among those with larger tears (Pandey et al.,
2016) and another among smaller tears (Cai, 2018). Another trial with PRP in a fibrin matrix
found lack of efficacy (Walsh et al., 2018, Barber, 2016). Treatment of tendinitis and partial
thickness tears with PRP suggested a lack of efficacy at 6- and 12-months (Kesikburun et al.,
2013, Shams et al., 2016). A RCT reported platelet-rich fibrin did not result in superior
rotator cuff repair results (Lädermann et al., 2016). Thus, as most studies suggest a lack of
efficacy, PRP injections are not recommended for treatment of shoulder pain and rotator
cuff tendinopathies.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

173

Thus, as studies conflict regarding efficacy, there is no recommendation regarding PRP
injections for treatment of shoulder pain and rotator cuff tendinopathies. The expert panel
vote on this recommendation was split as noted above.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Platelet-rich
Plasma Injections; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 200 articles in PubMed, 1532 in Scopus, 38760 in CINAHL, 94 in
Cochrane Library, 427 in Google Scholar, and 3 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 28 from PubMed, 5 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane Library, 2 from
Google Scholar, and 3 from other sources. Of the 40 articles considered for inclusion, 21
randomized trials and 13 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

NEEDLING AND BURSOSCOPY
Needling of calcium deposits and bursoscopy for removal of calcific tendinitis has been
performed (994,1051-1053). Needling is a precise procedure used to treat calcific deposits. It
makes small needle sized holes in the tissue overlying the calcific deposit. Needling has been
studied in conjunction with shockwave therapy (1051), and involves “several tens of intracalcic drillings in the axis of calcification” needling of the calcific deposits (1053). Bursoscopy is
arthroscopic removal/excision of the bursa.
Dry needling has been used for the treatment of calcific rotator cuff tendinopathies (10541062)
. Barbotage has also been used, which couples needling of calcific deposits with lavage
while generally using ultrasound for visualization (1063). Dry needling has also been used for
treatment of myofascial pain (see Trigger Points and Myofascial Pain).
ULTRASOUND-GUIDED NEEDLING WITH OR WITHOUT EXTRACORPOREAL SHOCKWAVE
THERAPY FOR CALCIFIC ROTATOR CUFF TENDINITIS
Recommended
Ultrasound-guided needling coupled with lavage with ultrasound visualization is
recommended for treatment of calcific rotator cuff tendinitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

174

Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Moderate to severe calcific rotator cuff tendinitis
Benefits
Improved pain and function at 1 year compared to steroid injection (de Witte et al., 2013),
although the benefits disappeared by 5 years (de Witte et al., 2017).
Harms
Infection, adhesive capsulitis, worsened pain
Frequency/Dose/Duration
One trial suggested post-procedure glucocorticosteroid injection with methylprednisolone
acetate 40mg improved results (Darrieutort-Laffite et al., 2019). Another trial suggested
modest superiority of triamcinolone acetonide vs. methylprednisolone acetate, apparently
using 40-mg doses for both, although the dose administered is a little unclear (Battaglia et
al., 2017).
Rationale
Dry needling has been performed for trigger points (see Trigger Points/Myofascial Pain).
One RCT suggested barbotage with ultrasound for visualization is modestly effective for
calcium deposits and function at one year but the differences disappeared by 5 years of
follow-up (de Witte et al., 2013, de Witte et al., 2017). Another moderate-quality trial
suggested adding needling is effective when used as an adjunct with shockwave therapy
(Krasny et al., 2005). Needling a calcific deposit is minimally invasive and less costly than
surgery with minimal adverse effects. One quality study suggested barbotage is more
effective over one year for treatment of calcific tendinitis; thus, it is selectively
recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Dry Needling;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 3 articles in
PubMed, 2325 in Scopus, 56 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 131 in Google Scholar, and 3
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 7 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 3 from other sources. Of the

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

175

14 articles considered for inclusion 12 randomized trials and 2 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
BURSOSCOPY FOR CALCIFIC ROTATOR CUFF TENDINITIS
Recommended
Bursoscopy (arthroscopic removal/excision of bursa) is recommended for treatment of
calcific rotator cuff tendinitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Gartner Type I or II calcium deposits of calcific tendinitis (Maugars et al., 2009). Patients
should generally have failed prior treatment with NSAIDs, exercise, and injection(s)
(Maugars et al., 2009).
Benefits
Removal of calcium deposits and improved pain.
Harms
Adhesive capsulitis, infection.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Treatment in the quality trial is a single treatment. It may be reasonable to attempt a
second treatment if the initial treatment was partially, but inadequately effective.
Rationale
There is one moderate-quality trial suggesting needling or bursoscopy is superior to a noninterventional control (Maugars et al., 2009). Addition of subacromial decompression to
bursectomy has been reportedly not effective (Clement, 2015). Bursoscopy and removal of
calcium deposits has been shown to be superior to a non-interventional control and thus is
selectively recommended.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

176

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Bursoscopy;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 2 articles in
PubMed, 34 in Scopus, 1 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 38 in Google Scholar, and 2 from
other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL,
0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources. Of the 2 articles
considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews fit the inclusion
criteria.

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

PROLOTHERAPY
Prolotherapy injection has been used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies (1064-1072).
PROLOTHERAPY FOR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
Not Recommended
Prolotherapy is not recommended for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
The highest quality placebo-controlled trial found prolotherapy was ineffective for bursal
injections and also reported evidence suggesting increased tendon stiffness in the
prolotherapy group (Chang et al., 2021). Two other placebo-controlled RCTs had baseline
differences making the results difficult to interpret (Bertrand et al., 2016, Lin et al., 2018).
Two comparative trials comparing prolotherapy with glucocorticoid injection conflict
regarding efficacy, and one of them reported comparable (in)efficacy at 6 months (Clement,
2015, Cole et al., 2018, Amanollahi et al., 2019). Because the sole placebo-controlled trial
suggests both lack of benefit and potential adverse effects, prolotherapy is not
recommended for rotator cuff tendinopathies.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

177

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Prolotherapy;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 21 articles in
PubMed, 913 in Scopus, 9 in CINAHL, 23 in Cochrane Library, 115 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 7 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 9
articles considered for inclusion, 8 randomized trials and 1 systematic review met the
inclusion criteria.

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

LIPOSOMAL BUPIVACAINE
Liposomal bupivacaine has been used for the treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies (10731081)
.
LIPOSOMAL BUPIVACAINE FOR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for liposomal bupivacaine.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
A placebo-controlled trial found lack of efficacy for the injection of subacromial liposomal
bupivacaine injected at the end of the arthroscopic procedure (Verdecchia et al., 2020).
Another placebo-controlled RCT found efficacy for injection near the superior part of the
brachial plexus at least 1 hour ahead of the procedure (Patel et al., 2020). Interscalene
blocks have been reportedly superior to liposomal bupivacaine (Abildgaard et al., 2017,
Namdari et al., 2017, Namdari, 2018), while another trial found them to be equivalent
(Sabesan et al., 2017). One trial found liposomal bupivacaine substantially effective (Sethi et
al., 2019). As there are multiple RCTs and they substantially conflict regarding efficacy, there
is no recommendation regarding liposomal bupivacaine.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

178

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Liposomal
Bupivacaine; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries,
shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus
tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 5
articles in PubMed, 176 in Scopus, 3 in CINAHL, 15 in Cochrane Library, 448 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 2 from PubMed, 11 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 15 articles considered for inclusion, 9 randomized trials and 3 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

STEM CELL INJECTIONS
Stem cell injections have been used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies (1082-1092).
STEM CELL INJECTIONS FOR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for stem cells for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no placebo-controlled trials. The available trials have quite small sample sizes and
are pilot studies. Thus, larger studies are needed for an evidence-based recommendation
and there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Stem Cells;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

179

controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 47 articles in
PubMed, 5943 in Scopus, 32 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 211 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 5 from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 3 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the
11 articles considered for inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 5 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

TRIGGER POINT INJECTIONS
Trigger point injections have been used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies with trigger
points (491,597,598,927,1093-1102). See Trigger Points and Myofascial Pain.

GROWTH HORMONE
Growth hormone has been used for the treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies (1103).
GROWTH HORMONE FOR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
Not Recommended
Growth hormone is not recommended for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Moderately Not Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
One RCT has evaluated growth hormone to improve post-operative healing, finding lack of
efficacy (Oh et al., 2018). Thus, growth hormone is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Growth Hormone,
Somatotropin, Human Growth Hormone; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear,
shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis,
subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 3 articles in PubMed, 290 in Scopus, 0 in

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

180

CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 157 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 1 article considered for
inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

GRANULOCYTE COLONY STIMULATING FACTOR (GCSF)
Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (GCSF), a type of cytokines receptor antagonist, has
been shown to induce bone marrow mobilization to increase circulating stem cell
concentration. No quality evidence was found for the treatment of rotator cuff
tendinopathies (1104,1105).
GRANULOCYTE COLONY-STIMULATING FACTOR (GCSF) FOR ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (GCSF) for treatment
of rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence of efficacy and thus there is no recommendation for GCSF.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Growth Colony
Stimulating Factor; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 0 articles in PubMed, 218 in Scopus, 41 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 25 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

181

PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ATELOCOLLAGEN
Atelocollagen has been used in the treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies (1106-1108).
ATELOCOLLAGEN FOR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for atelocollagen for treatment of rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is one RCT with relatively modestly sized groups, although some data suggest
potential efficacy (Kim et al., 2020). The study needs replication and thus there is no
recommendation for atelocollagen.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Atelocollagen;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 1 article in
PubMed, 15 in Scopus, 3 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 63 in Google Scholar, and 1 from
other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL,
0 from Cochrane Library, 2 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 4 articles
considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

182

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
SURGICAL REPAIR OF ROTATOR TEARS
Surgery has been used to treat rotator cuff tears. Yet, many individuals with rotator cuff
tears have minimal or no functional deficits; therefore, careful evaluation of the patient’s
functional status is required.
ROTATOR CUFF REPAIR FOR SMALL, MEDIUM, OR LARGE TEARS
Recommended
Rotator cuff repair is moderately recommended for selective treatment of small, medium,
or large tears (<5 cm).
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
A presumptive diagnosis of RCT requires both:
●
shoulder joint pain that increases with overhead use and
●
shoulder joint pain and/or weakness with resisted abduction.
A confirmatory diagnosis or RCT requires supportive findings from one of the following:
●
MRI,
●
MRA,
●
diagnostic US and/or arthroscopic surgery.
Nonoperative treatments for RCT may include:
●
nonopioid analgesics,
●
heat and/or ice,
●
exercises,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

183

●
subacromial glucocorticosteroid injection (unless a tear is high grade and requires
repair),
●
subacromial ketorolac injection,
●
ultrasound,
●
extracorporeal shockwave therapy (only for calcific tendinopathy).
Surgical considerations for small, medium and large RCTs include all of the following:
●
shoulder joint pain,
●
reduced range of motion and/or impaired function and imaging demonstrating a
complete rotator cuff tear. (Khazzam, 2020, Abtahi, 2015, Fan, 2022).
Benefits
Improved pain and function
Harms
Potential for lack of significant pain and/or function improvement, surgical complications,
lack of healing, adhesive capsulitis.
Rationale
There are many quality studies of surgery for RC tear, although there are no shamcontrolled trials. There are a few quality studies comparing surgical repair of rotator cuff
tears with non-operative treatment (see evidence table) that suggest that while exercises
and physical therapy may be a reasonable option for initially presenting rotator cuff tear
patients (Kukkonen et al., 2015, Heerspink et al., 2015, Moosmayer et al., 2014, MacDermid
et al., 2006, Ejnisman et al., 2004), there is important evidence of superiority of surgery for
small to medium tears over 5-10 year durations (Moosmayer et al., 2014, Moosmayer et al.,
2019).
While surgery tends to produce superior outcomes over 1 to 10 years (Moosmayer et al.,
2014, Moosmayer et al., 2010, Moosmayer et al., 2019) and there are no quality data to the
contrary, non-operative treatment often is successful (Moosmayer et al., 2014, Moosmayer
et al., 2010, Kukkonen et al., 2015). Thus, although many quality studies necessitated nonoperative treatment prior to surgery (see evidence table) (Mohtadi et al., 2014, Spangehl et
al., 2002), with some for at least 3 months (Mohtadi et al., 2014, Franceschi, 2007,
Franceschi et al., 2008, Iannotti et al., 2006), one for up to 33 months prior to surgery (these
trials are typically reported from countries with waiting lists for procedures) (Ko et al.,
2008), and some studies have required failure of a glucocorticosteroid injection (Franceschi
et al., 2007, Dorrestijn et al., 2007), there should be no requirement for failure of exercises,
injection(s), and physical therapy as a pre-operative requirement. Surgical cuff repair is
believed to be a superior option among patients for whom occupational shoulder exposures
and demands are greater, although quality data that address this issue are not available.
Rotator cuff repair has evolved from open to mini-open to all arthroscopic techniques.
Currently, arthroscopic techniques are evolving with the advent of new technology and

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

184

instrumentation (Ogilvie-Harris et al., 1993, Neviaser, 1989, Neer, 1972, Rockwood et al.,
1993, Ellman et al., 1993, Baker et al., 1995, Sauerbrey et al., 2005, Verma et al., 2006, Skoff,
1995, Youm et al., 2005, Seida JC, 2010). Rates of arthroscopic anterior acromioplasty have
increased 5. 8-fold from 1980 to 2005 (Yu et al., 2010). There are quality studies available on
short- and long-term comparisons between arthroscopic and open or mini-open repairs
(Carr et al., 2017, Spangehl et al., 2002, Nho et al., 2007, Morse et al., 2008, van der Zwaal
et al., 2013, Cho, 2012). Arthroscopic repair is associated with lower complication rates,
infection, and deltoid dehiscence. There is high-quality evidence showing no long-term
differences associated with arthroscopic repair and mini-open compared to open repair
(Carr et al., 2017, Mohtadi et al., 2005, Spangehl et al., 2002, van der Zwaal et al., 2013, Cho,
2012), although evidence suggests a modest short-term advantage of arthroscopic miniopen repair versus open repair of rotator cuff tears while infection rates are higher with
mini-open than arthroscopic repairs (Mohtadi et al., 2014).
Many individuals with rotator cuff tears have minimal or no functional deficits, (Moosmayer
et al., 2005, Needell et al., 1996, Sher et al., 1995, Schibany et al., 2004); thus, careful
evaluation of the patient’s functional status is required. Many patients function normally
with rotator cuff tears, while others have incapacitating problems that may require physical
therapy (Moosmayer et al., 2010, Moosmayer et al., 2014, Ainsworth et al., 2007) and/or
attempts at surgical repair or debridement. Rotator cuff tears have the potential to progress
(Matava et al., 2005, Yamaguchi et al., 2006). For patients with tears accompanied by
functional deficits, rotator cuff repairs appear to speed recovery. There also are reports of
improved overall health status after rotator cuff surgery (McKee et al., 2000). It is unclear
whether surgical repair of the rotator cuff changes the risk of future surgery. There are
different rating systems for grading rotator cuff tears including consideration of the size of
the tear, the extension of tear retraction, and the quality of the rotator cuff muscles (DeOrio
et al., 1984, Patte, 1990, Goutallier et al., 1994)(Bateman, 1963). Repairs of larger tears have
increased rate of healing failure which correlates with outcomes (Iannotti et al., 2006,
Milano et al., 2007, Wilson et al., 2002, Habernek et al., 1999, Warner, 2001).
There are many purported and documented risk factors for poorer surgical outcomes. These
most common risk factors include low-volume surgical practice (physician performs less
than 6 rotator cuff repairs per year) (Sherman et al., 2008), age (older patients) (Sherman et
al., 2008, Ogilvie-Harris et al., 1990, Boehm et al., 2005, Watson, 1985), female sex (Boehm
et al., 2005, Lindh et al., 1993), larger rotator cuff tears (Iannotti et al., 2006, Milano et al.,
2007, Wilson et al., 2002, Habernek et al., 1999, Warner, 2001, Bartolozzi et al., 1994,
Rokito et al., 1996), retraction (Milano et al., 2007), concomitant subscapularis tears (Milano
et al., 2007), fatty tendon degeneration (Milano et al., 2007, Costouros et al., 2007),
diabetes, smoking (Mallon et al., 2004), overweight or obesity, weakness of shoulder
(strength of abduction and external rotation), pre-operative activity level, (Iannotti et al.,
2006, Ellman et al., 1986), preoperative stiffness (Namdari et al., 2010), abnormal mental
status, involvement in litigation or workers’ compensation (Spangehl et al., 2002, OgilvieHarris et al., 1990, Kempf et al., 1999, Misamore et al., 1995) or sick leave (Brox et al., 1999),
regular “pain medication use" (Brox et al., 1999), excessive post-operative hyperalgesic
crises (Kempf et al., 1999), non-compliance with rehabilitation programs, and otherwise
unhealthy individuals (Sherman et al., 2008). One report found shorter interval between
symptom onset and massive rotator cuff repair to be negatively correlated with outcomes

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

185

(Gerber et al., 2000). Post-operative shoulder stiffness was found to be best predicted by
pre-operative limitation in ROM (Namdari et al., 2010), especially the “hand behind the
back” maneuver (Trenerry et al., 2005). Work with the “hand above the level of the head”
trended towards significance in one possibly underpowered study (Brox et al., 1999).
Studies suggest delayed treatment results in worse outcomes among patients with rotator
cuff tears (Habernek et al., 1999, Fu, 2020, Duncan, 2015), but no quality study has
addressed that question.
If surgery is a consideration, counseling regarding likely outcomes, risks, and benefits, and
especially expectations, is important. Ideally, this education begins with the referring
physician who may note that post-operative physical or occupational therapy exercises are
essential in comparison to non-operative treatment for good clinical results. Compliance
with these exercises might be difficult for some rotator cuff repair patients. The decision as
to which type of rotator cuff repair procedure to perform – arthroscopic, open, or mini-open
repair – should be left to the surgeon and patient until quality evidence demonstrating
procedural superiority becomes available to provide evidence-based guidance. Achievement
of a plateau in improvement and assessment for final results after surgical repair of a
rotator cuff tear has been found to require 1 year (Van Linthoudt et al., 2003). Revision
surgeries are particularly challenging, usually result in inferior results compared with
primary repairs, and should be undertaken with a good deal of caution (Djurasovic et al.,
2001).
Re-tear rates vary widely, depending on numerous factors especially the size of the tear and
the quality of the tendon and rotator cuff muscles. The re-tear rate for a single row
arthroscopic repair has been estimated at 40%, but varies considerably depending on the
size of original tear (Burks, 2009, Bishop et al., 2006, Fealy et al., 2006, Gladstone et al.,
2007, Liu et al., 1994). There is little quality evidence for superiority of one type of repair
over another (e.g., single stitch versus double stitch) (Malavolta et al., 2014, Randelli et al.,
2017, Franceschi et al., 2007, Burks, 2009, Grasso et al., 2009, Lapner et al., 2012, Carbonel
et al., 2012, Ma et al., 2012, Koh et al., 2011) or No. 3 Ethibond Mason-Allen sutures versus
1. 0 mm polydioxanone cord with modified Kessler sutures (Boehm et al., 2005). A metaanalysis and systematic review found double-row repair to have lower re-tear rates and
greater internal rotation ROM but showed no other differences compared to single-row
repair (Xu et al., 2014, Saridakis et al., 2010). One trial suggested a markedly lower re-tear
rate with suture-spanning augmentation technique of single-row compared with standard
single row repair (Ma et al., 2019). There is one moderate-quality study that has suggested a
modified mattress-locking stitch is modestly superior to simple stitches; however, the study
has considerable weaknesses that raise questions about the validity of the conclusions (Ko
et al., 2008). One study of arthroscopic repairs with long-term follow-up of up to 14 years
looked at staple fixation repairs and side-to-side suture and anchor repairs; both kinds of
repairs appear to document surgical success, although larger tears appear associated with
lower success rates (Wilson et al., 2002). Almost all repairs require reattachment of tendon
to bone. Isolated side-to-side repair or margin convergence means that there is an
incomplete repair as is usually present in cases of chronic massive tears. Tendon to bone
repair has been suggested to be modestly better than side-to-side repair in one moderatequality study (Bigoni et al., 2009). Re-tears do not necessarily equate to pain and functional

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

186

loss, just as some people have primary asymptomatic rotator cuff tears. Research suggests
outcome scores are better with healed rotator cuff than unhealed rotator cuff tears.
Most quality evidence included patients with small to moderate tears. Patients who are
candidates for surgery generally have pain and impaired function. There are no quality
studies suggesting better or worse results for earlier or delayed surgery (see evidence
table), and current evidence does not support a need to rush surgical decisions. Until quality
evidence becomes available to provide evidence-based guidance, the decision as to which
surgical procedure to perform should be left to the surgeon and patient as there appear to
be only modest short-term improvements for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair over open
rotator cuff repairs (Mohtadi et al., 2014) or for impingement syndrome, including trends
towards shorter sick leave in one study (mean 10 versus 5. 7 weeks) (Husby et al., 2003) but
not another (Rubenthaler et al., 2003). Early surgery should generally be considered in cases
of acute traumatic tears, especially larger tears in healthy, active individuals; however, one
trial has suggested no benefit of earlier surgery (Kim et al., 2018). Surgery is invasive,
involves prolonged recovery (many months), has adverse effects, and is costly. However,
benefits appear to outweigh risks for patients with significant pain, impaired function, and a
documented tear; thus, surgery is recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Rotator Cuff
Repair; arthroscopy, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 980 articles in PubMed, 5738 in Scopus, 29247 in CINAHL, 34 in
Cochrane Library, 2550 in Google Scholar, and 12 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 10 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 4 from CINAHL, 3 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 12 from other sources. Of the 24 articles considered for inclusion, 21
randomized trials and 5 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
REVERSE SHOULDER ARTHROPLASTY FOR MASSIVE ROTATOR CUFF TEARS
Sometimes Recommended
Reverse shoulder arthroplasty is recommended for treatment of select large to massive cuff
tears that are otherwise unrepairable.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

187

Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
A presumptive diagnosis of RCT requires both:
●
shoulder joint pain that increases with overhead use and
●
shoulder joint pain and/or weakness with resisted abduction.
A confirmatory diagnosis or RCT requires supportive findings from one of the following:
●
MRI,
●
MRA,
●
diagnostic US and/or arthroscopic surgery.
Nonoperative treatments for RCT may include:
●
nonopioid analgesics,
●
heat and/or ice,
●
exercises,
●
subacromial glucocorticosteroid injection (unless a tear is high grade and requires
repair),
●
subacromial ketorolac injection,
●
ultrasound,
●
extracorporeal shockwave therapy (only for calcific tendinopathy).
Surgical considerations include all of the following:
●
shoulder joint pain,
●
reduced range of motion and/or impaired function,
●
imaging demonstrating a large to massive complete rotator cuff tear, and
●
either an unrepairable tear, failed surgical repair, or significant fatty infiltration
(Khazzam, 2020, Abtahi, 2015, Fan, 2022).
Benefits
Potential to improve the pain and functional decrements, although reverse shoulder
arthroplasty may not result in complete recovery of function for repair of massive tears.
Harms
Potential for lack of significant pain and/or function improvement, surgical complications,
lack of healing, adhesive capsulitis.
Rationale
There are no quality studies comparing reverse shoulder arthroplasty with non-surgical
management of massive rotator cuff tears or to other surgical procedures. Reverse shoulder
arthroplasty is generally reserved and selectively recommended for highly select cases of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

188

large to massive cuff tears that are either unrepairable or have failed repair, yet there are
significant functional deficits that are felt likely or potentially able to be addressed through
reverse shoulder arthroplasty. Additionally, a quality postoperative rehabilitation program is
essential to effect better outcomes.

ACUTE MASSIVE TEARS
ROTATOR CUFF REPAIR FOR ACUTE MASSIVE TEARS
Sometimes Recommended
Rotator cuff repair is selectively recommended for treatment of acute massive tears (>5
cm).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
All of the following: 1) shoulder joint pain; 2) reduced range of motion of the shoulder or
impaired function; 3) imaging findings by MRI, MR arthrography, or ultrasound of massive
rotator cuff tear. Generally, younger, healthier patients are better candidates for surgery for
massive tears.
Benefits
Potential to improve the pain and functional decrements, although surgery often does not
result in complete recovery for repair of massive tears.
Harms
Potential for lack of significant pain and/or function improvement, surgical complications,
lack of healing, adhesive capsulitis.
Rationale
Repair of massive rotator cuff tears is technically more difficult and has a worse prognosis
(Galatz, 2004, Matthews et al., 2006). There are no quality studies comparing these repairs
with non-operative treatment for massive tears, although many surgeons will recommend
an initial trial of non-operative care for elderly patients with massive rotator cuff tears.
Some chronic massive tears can be repaired and some can also undergo successful partial
repair, although this does not apply for most patients. Most repairs are tendon to bone. One
quality study solely addressed surgical repair of massive rotator cuff tears (Iannotti et al.,
2006). Surgical repairs have utilized multiple different techniques, with a preference for
primary repair when the patient’s tissue may be approximated. A study of 27 shoulders
found primary rotator cuff repair was often infeasible when the length was greater than
4cm, the width was greater than 4cm, the supraspinatus muscle was thin at the superior
glenoid margin, and the signal intensity was high (Sugihara et al., 2003).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

189

Most quality evidence included patients with small to moderate tears, where there is some
evidence that surgical outcomes are superior to non-surgical treatment at 5-10 years,
although those trials did not include patients with massive tears (Moosmayer et al., 2019,
Moosmayer et al., 2014). Patients who are candidates for surgery generally have pain and
impaired function. There are no quality studies suggesting better or worse results for earlier
or delayed surgery for massive tears (see evidence table), and current evidence does not
support a need to rush surgical decisions (Moosmayer et al., 2019, Moosmayer et al., 2014).
Until quality evidence becomes available to provide evidence-based guidance, the decision
as to which surgical procedure to perform should be left to the surgeon and patient as there
appear to be only modest short-term improvements for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair over
open rotator cuff repairs (Mohtadi et al., 2014) or for impingement syndrome, including
trends towards shorter sick leave in one study (mean 10 versus 5. 7 weeks) (Husby et al.,
2003) but not all (Rubenthaler et al., 2003).
Early surgery should be considered in cases of acute traumatic tears, especially larger tears
in healthy, active individuals. Surgery is invasive, involves prolonged recovery (many
months), has adverse effects, and is costly. However, benefits appear to outweigh risks for
patients with significant pain, impaired function and a documented massive tear, and
surgery is thus selectively recommended, particularly for younger healthier patients.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Rotator Cuff
Repair; arthroscopy, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 980 articles in PubMed, 5738 in Scopus, 29247 in CINAHL, 34 in
Cochrane Library, 2550 in Google Scholar, and 40 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 10 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 4 from CINAHL, 3 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 40 from other sources. Of the 57 articles considered for inclusion, 49
randomized trials and 5 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

CHRONIC MASSIVE TEARS
ROTATOR CUFF REPAIR FOR CHRONIC MASSIVE TEARS
Not Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

190

Rotator cuff repair is not generally recommended for treatment of chronic massive tears (>5
cm).
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Surgery for massive tears is less successful than for smaller and moderate-sized tears. Repair
of massive rotator cuff tears is technically more difficult and has a worse prognosis
(Matthews et al., 2006, Galatz, 2004). Subacromial balloon spacers are being used, however,
there are insufficient RCTs and confounding with simultaneous bicipital tenotomy is present
in the available literature (Metcalfe, 2022). There are no quality studies comparing these
repairs with non-operative treatment, although many surgeons will recommend an initial
trial of non-operative care for elderly patients with massive rotator cuff tears. Some chronic
massive tears can be repaired and some can also undergo successful partial repair, although
this does not apply for most patients. Some indicators suggesting the potential for
successful repair include otherwise good health and function with a lack of fatty infiltration.
Most repairs are tendon to bone. One quality study solely addressed surgical repair of
massive rotator cuff tears (Iannotti et al., 2006). Surgical repairs have utilized multiple
different techniques, with a preference for primary repair when the patient’s tissue may be
approximated. A study of 27 shoulders found primary rotator cuff repair was often
infeasible when the length was greater than 4cm, the width was greater than 4cm, the
supraspinatus muscle was thin at the superior glenoid margin, and the signal intensity was
high (Sugihara et al., 2003).
Surgery also appears more successful for acute rather than chronic tears. Also, while surgery
tends to produce modestly superior outcomes over 1 to 5 years (Moosmayer et al., 2014),
non-operative treatment is often successful (Moosmayer et al., 2014, Kukkonen et al.,
2015). Thus, physical therapy is a reasonable option for many patients (Moosmayer et al.,
2014, Kukkonen et al., 2015).
Surgery is invasive, involves prolonged recovery (many months), has adverse effects, and is
costly. Benefits appear to generally be outweighed by risks for patients with chronic massive
tears and thus is not recommended. Instead, rehabilitation is recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Rotator Cuff
Repair; arthroscopy, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 980 articles in PubMed, 5738 in Scopus, 29247 in CINAHL, 34 in
Cochrane Library, 2550 in Google Scholar, and 40 from other sources†. We considered for

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

191

inclusion 10 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 4 from CINAHL, 3 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 40 from other sources. Of the 57 articles considered for inclusion, 49
randomized trials and 5 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

XENOGRAFTING
ROTATOR CUFF REPAIR FOR MASSIVE TEARS USING PORCINE XENOGRAFT MATERIAL
Not Recommended
Porcine small intestine submucosa graft for surgical repair is not recommended for
treatment of large or massive tears that are otherwise unrepairable.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
When primary closure with approximation of the tendon tissue is not possible, utilization of
graft material, including the patient’s bicipital tendon (Cho, 2009) or subscapularis (Tanaka
et al., 2006), is sometimes utilized (i.e., autografts). Additional materials interposed include
porcine dermal xenograft (Badhe, 2008) and porcine small intestinal submucosa (Sclamberg
et al., 2004). Neither of the latter appeared to fare well, and the sole quality trial that
included only patients with massive tears failed to find improvements with a porcine small
intestinal submucosa graft (Iannotti et al., 2006); thus, is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Rotator Cuff
Repair; arthroscopy, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 980 articles in PubMed, 5738 in Scopus, 29247 in CINAHL, 34 in
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

192

Cochrane Library, 2550 in Google Scholar, and 40 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 10 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 4 from CINAHL, 3 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 40 from other sources. Of the 57 articles considered for inclusion, 49
randomized trials and 5 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

TISSUE AUGMENTATION
ROTATOR CUFF REPAIR FOR MASSIVE TEARS USING TISSUE AUGMENTATION
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against tissue augmentation to surgically repair large or
massive tears that are otherwise unrepairable.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Repair of massive rotator cuff tears is technically more difficult and has a worse prognosis
(Matthews et al., 2006, Galatz, 2004). There are no quality studies comparing these repairs
with non-operative treatment, although many surgeons will recommend an initial trial of
non-operative care for elderly patients with massive rotator cuff tears. Some chronic
massive tears can be repaired and some can also undergo successful partial repair, although
this does not apply for most patients. Most repairs are tendon to bone. One quality study
solely addressed surgical repair of massive rotator cuff tears (Iannotti et al., 2006). Surgical
repairs have utilized multiple different techniques, with a preference for primary repair
when the patient’s tissue may be approximated. A study of 27 shoulders found primary
rotator cuff repair was often infeasible when the length was greater than 4cm, the width
was greater than 4cm, the supraspinatus muscle was thin at the superior glenoid margin,
and the signal intensity was high (Sugihara et al., 2003).
Techniques include open repair (Worland et al., 1999), arthroscopic, arthroplasty-related
procedures (Boileau et al., 2008), as well as tissue transfers (latissimus dorsi) (Costouros et
al., 2007), tissue grafting (autograft, allograft, xenograft) (Tsiridis et al., 2008), and
combination procedures (Boileau et al., 2008). Two studies suggest no meaningful
differences between arthroscopic and mini-open repairs (Kasten et al., 2011, Cho, 2012).
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

193

Tissue grafts are intended to augment a repair, not fill a tissue defect. There is insufficient
evidence currently to recommend a particular type of graft. Cases of margin convergence
may be amenable to a primary closure, if the tendon edges can be approximated without
undue tension on the patient’s remaining rotator cuff. A few of these repairs were included
in the available quality literature (see evidence table), but did not present stratified analyses
specific to massive rotator cuff tears. Even so, there is some limited evidence suggesting
repair is superior to debridement with considerably better results in the surgical repaired
group (Melillo, 1997); thus, there is limited evidence to recommend attempted repair of
massive rotator cuff tears (Iannotti et al., 2006).
When primary closure with approximation of the tendon tissue is not possible, utilization of
graft material, including the patient’s bicipital tendon (Cho, 2009) or subscapularis (Tanaka
et al., 2006), is sometimes utilized (i.e., autografts). Additional materials interposed include
porcine dermal xenograft (Badhe, 2008) and porcine small intestinal submucosa (Sclamberg
et al., 2004). Neither of the latter appeared to fare well, and the sole quality trial that
included only patients with massive tears failed to find improvements with a porcine small
intestinal submucosa graft (Iannotti et al., 2006); thus, is not recommended.
Hemiarthroplasty has also been used to treat select patients with massive tears (see
Arthroplasty), but there are no quality studies of hemiarthroplasty for treatment of massive
rotator cuff tears (de Cupis et al., 2008, Boileau et al., 2005). Reverse total shoulder
replacement is currently being used more often with more predictable results. It also is used
to treat selected patients with unrepairable massive rotator cuff tears (Matsen et al., 2007).
Case series of patients who have reportedly undergone debridement and subacromial
decompression as part of treatment of full-thickness, irreparable rotator cuff tears have
found some decrease in pain and improved ROM, although post-operative strength was
reduced (Gartsman et al., 1997). A review suggested debridement alone was insufficient for
treatment for massive rotator cuff tears (Melillo, 1997). A case series found biceps
tenotomy did not add benefits over debridement of irreparable massive rotator cuff tears
(Klinger et al., 2005). Reverse total shoulder has been used for shoulder osteoarthritis
associated massive cuff ruptures (de Cupis et al., 2008, Boileau et al., 2005, Young et al.,
2009). In a case series, the reverse total shoulder appears to improve function (de Cupis et
al., 2008).
In the quality trials that included a minority of patients with massive tears, there are no
stratified analyses presented to identify outcomes for this specific population of patients. It
has been suggested that the outcomes for patients with larger tears are inferior to smaller
tears (Bengtsson et al., 2006, Bhattacharyya et al., 2014, Biberthaler et al., 2013). Patients
who are candidates for surgery should have pain and reduced function and understand the
risks and benefits of these procedures. Infections are generally rare and are most commonly
associated with mini-open repair (Herrera, 2002). The decision as to which type of rotator
cuff repair procedure to perform for massive tears must be left to the surgeon and patient
until quality evidence becomes available to provide evidence-based guidance. Surgical
repair of massive rotator cuff tears is invasive, has adverse effects, and is costly.
Rehabilitation is often considerably longer and more complicated than for smaller rotator

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

194

cuff tears. However, particularly in younger patients with massive rotator cuff tears,
benefits appear to outweigh risks for most patients and surgery is generally recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Rotator Cuff
Repair; arthroscopy, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 980 articles in PubMed, 5738 in Scopus, 29247 in CINAHL, 34 in
Cochrane Library, 2550 in Google Scholar, and 40 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 10 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 4 from CINAHL, 3 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 40 from other sources. Of the 57 articles considered for inclusion, 49
randomized trials and 5 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SUBACROMIAL DECOMPRESSION SURGERY
Surgery for impingement syndrome has been developed over many decades (44,1109-1118). It
was originally described by Neer in 1972 as part of a continuum including surgery for rotator
cuff tears, and subsequently modified to less invasive techniques. Arthroscopic approaches
were then developed to attempt to further minimize surgical morbidity from large incisions
and, by avoiding direct trauma to the deltoid, promote earlier active exercises and recovery
and utilize lasers (1110,1119-1125). Arthroscopy also enhances ability to identify relevant
associated pathology – partial articular side cuff tears, biceps tears, labral pathology.
Impingement syndrome and rotator cuff tendinoses without tears are sometimes treated
surgically, particularly after failure of non-operative treatments (105,871,1126-1135) with some
arguing for aggressive treatment. (1133) As the prevalence of these conditions is exceedingly
high and many individuals with tendinoses are apparently asymptomatic (see above),
careful incorporation of accurate diagnosis, the patient’s condition, functional status and
response to prior treatments appears particularly important. Risk factors for adverse
outcomes are believed to be mostly similar to those for full-thickness rotator cuff tears and
may be particularly important in the setting of workers’ compensation (see above).
Education regarding post-operative rehabilitation is thought to be important for these
patients, as it is for those with rotator cuff tears. Claviculectomy or subacromial
decompression in rotator cuff repair has been used for the treatment of rotator cuff
tendinopathies (1136-1153).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

195

SUBACROMIAL DECOMPRESSION SURGERY FOR IMPINGEMENT SYNDROME/ROTATOR
CUFF TENDINOSES
Recommended
Subacromial decompression surgery is recommended for treatment of select patients with
impingement syndrome/rotator cuff tendinoses.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
All of the following:
●
shoulder joint pain (e.g., symptomatic with positive supraspinatus test, impingement
signs);
●
reduced active shoulder ROM or impaired function
●
imaging findings by MRI or ultrasound of rotator cuff tendinopathy consistent with
symptoms; and
●
temporary resolution or marked reduction in pain immediately after injection of a
local anesthetic into the subacromial space.
Generally should not have scapular dyskinesia, which should be treated with exercises and is
believed to be a relative contraindication to surgery (Panagiotopoulos AC, 2019, Kibler,
2006)
Patients should also have failed one or more glucocorticosteroid injections (see above) and
at least one trial of a quality rehabilitation program that follows evidence-based guidelines
(see above).
Benefits
Improved or resolved pain.
Harms
Adhesive capsulitis, failure to improve, surgical complications.
Rationale
There are no sham-surgery controlled trials of surgical interventions for impingement
syndrome. However, there are several moderate-quality RCTs with many reports that
compared subacromial decompression plus physical therapy versus physical therapy
exercises for treatment of impingement syndrome (Paavola, 2018, Ketola, 2013, Ketola,
2015, Ketola et al., 2017, Ketola et al., 2016, Beard, 2018, Cuff et al., 2012, Rahme et al.,
1998, Haahr et al., 2005, Brox et al., 1999, Ketola, 2009, Haahr et al., 2006). Importantly,
one of these trials included a comparison with both exercise as well as sham-laser treatment
(Svendsen et al., 2013, Brox et al., 1999). That trial found surgery and rehabilitation superior
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

196

to placebo laser and provides the primary basis for an evidence-based selective
recommendation in favor of surgery, but only after other treatments have failed. All of
these trials comparing physical therapy/exercise with surgery appear to have considerable
biases in favor of surgery over physiotherapy/exercise for at least two major reasons: 1)
patients invariably appear to have been required to fail prior non-operative treatment that
when described included considerable exercise components (thus a “more of the same” bias
against physical therapy/ exercise); and 2) likely greater treatment contact time in the
surgical groups which were combined with physical therapy/exercise. Except for (Rahme et
al., 1998), these studies reported mostly failed prior rehabilitation and found surgery
superior to physical therapy exercise (Svendsen et al., 2013, Zakaria, 2004, Haahr et al.,
2006). However, it also has been noted that there is a high rate of crossover to surgery over
time (Brox et al., 1999).
There is moderate-quality evidence that there are no long-term differences associated with
arthroscopic compared to open decompression to treat impingement syndrome/rotator cuff
tendinoses (Lindh et al., 1993, Husby et al., 2003, Sachs et al., 1994), although there is some
evidence of a modest short-term advantage of arthroscopy over open decompression for
faster recovery (Sachs et al., 1994). (A low-quality trial also reported similar evidence
(T'Jonck et al., 1997).) Open acromioplasty in patients with impingement syndrome appears
not to prevent progression to rotator cuff tear in a nine-year follow-up study. (Hyvonen et
al., 1998). A case-control study found no evidence that calcium deposits in the rotator cuff
seen on x-ray affected outcomes at 2 years after arthroscopic subacromial decompression
(Tillander et al., 1998). Experience of the surgeon and patient factors require judgment in
selecting operative approaches. Long-term outcomes of up to 25 years have also reported
excellent or good results in 77% of patients with various arthroscopic decompression
techniques (Budoff et al., 2005, Ellman et al., 1991, Odenbring et al., 2008, Chin et al., 2007).
Limited motion may indicate adhesive capsulitis or capsular stiffness that would be a
relative contraindication to surgery. Patients with rotator cuff syndromes or impingement
typically do not have significant limitations of passive motion and if they do, then the
diagnosis may be in doubt. Surgery is invasive, has adverse effects, and is costly. However, in
carefully select patients with impingement syndrome/rotator cuff tendinoses who have
failed quality non-operative treatments, benefits appear to outweigh risks and surgery is
recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Claviculectomy or
Subacromial Decompression Or Mumford procedure or acromioplasty; rotator cuff
tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement
syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic
review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 103 articles in PubMed,
1815 in Scopus, 96 in CINAHL, 76 in Cochrane Library, 704 in Google Scholar, and 30 from
other sources†. We considered for inclusion 5 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

197

1 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 30 from other sources. Of the 39
articles considered for inclusion, 36 randomized trials and 3 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ADDITION OF CLAVICULECTOMY OR SUBACROMIAL DECOMPRESSION TO A ROTATOR
CUFF REPAIR FOR ISOLATED SUPRASPINATUS TEARS
Not Recommended
Adding claviculectomy or subacromial decompression to a rotator cuff repair is moderately
not recommended for treatment of isolated supraspinatus tears.
Strength of evidence Moderately Not Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
There is moderate-quality evidence suggesting there is no demonstrable benefit in adding
subacromial decompression to a rotator cuff repair for treatment of isolated supraspinatus
tears with a Type II acromion in quality studies with up to 2 years follow-up data
(Rubenthaler et al., 2003, Kukkonen et al., 2015, Milano et al., 2007, Gartsman et al., 2004,
Chahal et al., 2012, Oh et al., 2014)(Abrams et al., 2014) or a repair using transosseous
equivalent suture-bridge technique along with subacromial decompression (Cuff et al.,
2012). One trial found no statistical benefit for subacromial decompression for subacromial
shoulder pain (Greenall, 2018) and another found no benefit compared with physiotherapy
at 2-3 years (Farfaras et al., 2016). Yet, a trial with 10-year follow-up found better results in
the subacromial decompression group than therapy (Farfaras et al., 2018). A post-hoc
analysis of a different trial at 12 years found minimal, non-statistically significant
improvement in the acromioplasty group (Kolk et al., 2017). There are two moderate quality
studies comparing arthroscopic debridement and subacromial decompression in treatment
of full-thickness tears of the rotator cuff (Melillo, 1997, Montgomery et al., 1994). Another
trial found comparability between subacromial decompression and exercise at 2 years
(Paavola, 2018). There is one moderate-quality trial suggesting SLAP lesions found at the
same time as rotator cuff tears in those over 50 years old do not require repair, rather
biceps tenotomy outperforms the SLAP repair (Franceschi et al., 2008). Thus, the quality
evidence does not support the addition of clavulectomy or subacromial decompression to
an isolated RC tear.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

198

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Claviculectomy or
Subacromial Decompression Or Mumford procedure or acromioplasty; rotator cuff
tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement
syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic
review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 103 articles in PubMed,
1815 in Scopus, 96 in CINAHL, 76 in Cochrane Library, 704 in Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources†. We considered for inclusion 5 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL,
1 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 9 articles
considered for inclusion, 5 randomized trials and 3 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SCAFFOLDING
Biological and synthetic scaffolding has been used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies
(983,1087,1154-1167)
.
SCAFFOLDING FOR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against scaffolding for rotator cuff tendinopathy.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are few studies on scaffolding. Although one study has suggested short-term efficacy,
the differences were gone by 2 years. Thus, additional research is needed before an
evidence-based recommendation is possible.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Scaffolding,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

199

Biological Scaffold, Synthetic Scaffold; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder
pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial
bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 36 articles in PubMed, 214 in Scopus, 2 in CINAHL, 4 in Cochrane
Library, 28 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 11
from PubMed, 4 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 16 articles considered for inclusion, 2 randomized
trials and 7 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

TENODESIS AND TENOTOMY
Tenodesis and tenotomy have been used for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathy with or
without rotator cuff tendinopathies (1168-1225).

ACELLULAR HUMAN DERMAL MATRIX
Acellular human dermal matrices can be used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies (1163,12261233)
.
ACELLULAR HUMAN DERMAL MATRIX FOR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHY
Sometimes Recommended
Acellular human dermal matrix is selectively recommended for treatment of large rotator
cuff tears.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Repair of large cuff tears.
Benefits
Improved function and improved tendon healing at 2 years.
Harms
Increased post-operative complication rate.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

200

Rationale
One RCT suggests considerable efficacy for the treatment of large cuff tears (Barber et al.,
2012). Thus, acellular human dermal matrix augmentation is selectively recommended for
large cuff tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Acellular Human
Dermal Matrix; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 8 articles in PubMed, 96 in Scopus, 3 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane
Library, 33 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 3 from
PubMed, 5 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Of the 8 articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 1
systematic review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

RECOMBINANT HUMAN BONE MORPHOGENETIC PROTEIN-12 (RHBMP-12)
Recombinant Human Bone Morphogenetic Protein-12 (rhBMP-12) has been used to treat
tendon injuries, including rotator cuff tendinopathies (569) (570).
RECOMBINANT HUMAN BONE MORPHOGENETIC PROTEIN-12 (RHBMP-12) FOR ROTATOR
CUFF TENDINOPATHY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against recombinant human bone morphogenetic
protein-12.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

201

There are small studies, but no moderate- or large-scale studies with clinical outcome
measures suggesting efficacy. Thus, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Recombinant
Human Bone Morphogenetic Protein-12 (rhBMP-12); rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff
tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis,
subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 1 article in PubMed, 127 in Scopus, 1 in
CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 0 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 2 articles considered for
inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SUPERIOR CAPSULE RECONSTRUCTION
SUPERIOR CAPSULE RECONSTRUCTION
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against superior capsule reconstruction (SCR).
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality literature addressing superior capsule reconstruction and thus there is no
recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Superior capsule
reconstruction; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

202

trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 17 articles in PubMed, 92 in Scopus, 11 in CINAHL, 2 in Cochrane
Library, 445 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 11
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 4 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 15 articles considered for inclusion, 0 randomized
trials and 6 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

RADIOFREQUENCY MICROTENOTOMY
Radiofrequency microtenotomy has been used to treat rotator cuff tendinopathies (1113,12341237)
.
RADIOFREQUENCY MICROTENOTOMY FOR ROTATOR CUFF TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Radiofrequency microtenotomy is not recommended for adjunctive treatment with
subacromial decompression or bursectomy.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Two RCTs have assessed radiofrequency microtenotomy, both suggesting a lack of additive
benefit to subacromial decompression (Lu et al., 2013) or bursectomy (Al-Ani et al., 2019);
thus, it is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Radiofrequency
Microtenotomy; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 4 articles in PubMed, 127 in Scopus, 2 in CINAHL, 7 in Cochrane
Library, 27 in Google Scholar, and 3 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 2 from
PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 2 from Google Scholar,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

203

and 3 from other sources. Of the 7 articles considered for inclusion, 2 randomized trials and
2 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHY AND RUPTURED BICIPITAL TENDON
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The following section contains recommendations for evaluating and managing Bicipital
Tendinopathy and Ruptured Bicipital Tendon from the Evidence-Based Shoulder Disorders
Panel. These recommendations are based on critically appraised higher-quality research
evidence or, when such evidence was unavailable or inconsistent, on expert consensus as
required in ACOEM’s Methodology. Recommendations are made under the following
categories:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Strongly Recommended, “A” Level
Moderately Recommended, “B” Level
Recommended, “C” Level
Insufficient – Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – No Recommendation (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – Not Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Not Recommended, “C” Level
Moderately Not Recommended, “B” Level
Strongly Not Recommended, “A” Level

OVERVIEW
Bicipital tendinopathy involving the proximal long head of the biceps tendon (bicipital
tendon) is usually due to degenerative changes in the tendon or wear in the bicipital groove.
The bicipital tendon sheath may also be involved in inflammatory arthropathies. (Note that
the distal end of the biceps is involved in biceps strains and ruptures at the elbow, which
typically have significantly different prognoses; see Elbow Disorders Guideline.) Bicipital
tendinopathy is believed to be analogous and parallel to and have the same
pathophysiological basis as the rotator cuff, including having tenuous vascular supply to the
affected areas. It is recommended that symptomatic bicipital tendinopathy be managed as
noted in the Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies section, including the selective use of low-dose
glucocorticosteroid injection. Bicipital tendon rupture may be managed non-operatively for
the vast majority of patients as there is no accompanying functional disability. Surgery,
typically tenodesis, may be desired for cosmetic reasons, especially in select athletes and

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

204

bodybuilders or others concerned with cosmesis, but it is not necessary for restoration of
function in the general population (1238).

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been used to diagnose bicipital tendinopathy (12391246)
.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against MRI to diagnose bicipital tendinopathy.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies on the use of MRI for the diagnosis of bicipital tendinopathy.
The bicipital tendon is relatively superficial and is accessible with physical examination,
which helps obviate the need for MRI, especially as the tendon is prone to degeneration.
Thus, abnormal MRIs in the absence of disease are predictable. Therefore, there is no
recommendation for MRI. However, MRI may be indicated for patients with rotator cuffrelated problems.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI); bicipital tendinosis, bicipital tendinopathy, shoulder pain,
ruptured bicipital tendon, biceps tendon tear; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity,
positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy,
efficiency. We found and reviewed 2,530 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we
did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 2,530 articles,
19,545 in Scopus, 226 in CINAHL, 1,973 in Cochrane Library, 2,650 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 2 from PubMed, 6 from Scopus, 0 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero
articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contain no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

205

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
INITIAL CARE
Initial care of bicipital tendinopathies nearly always involves non-operative treatment,
including among those with a complete tear. Educating the patient regarding the generally
good long-term prognosis regardless of the presence or absence of a tear and need to
continue use and ROM exercises is recommended. For patients with significant pain, overthe-counter (OTC) analgesics (NSAIDs, acetaminophen) and self-applications of heat and ice
are recommended. Slings and immobilizers are not recommended.
Bicipital tendinopathy treatment recommendations largely require inference from RCTs
(other than for injections and surgery, see below), as quality studies are not currently
available. Thus, all of these inferential recommendations are listed as “Insufficient Evidence
(I)” with low levels of confidence. See also the Indications, Harms, Benefits,
Frequency/Dose/Duration, Indications for Discontinuation, and Rationale in the Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathies recommendations.

ACTIVITY MODIFICATION AND EXERCISE
Bicipital tendinopathy treatment recommendations largely require inference from RCTs
(other than for injections and surgery, see below), as quality studies are not currently
available. Thus, all of these inferential recommendations are listed as “Insufficient Evidence
(I)” with low levels of confidence. See also the Indications, Harms, Benefits,
Frequency/Dose/Duration, Indications for Discontinuation, and Rationale in the Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathies recommendations.
EXERCISE PRESCRIPTIONS FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Exercise prescriptions are recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Exercise, Exercise
Therapy; bicipital tendinosis, bicipital tendinopathy, shoulder pain, ruptured bicipital
tendon, biceps tendon tear; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 988 articles in PubMed, 38641 in Scopus, 481 in CINAHL, 495 in
Cochrane Library, 553 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 0 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

206

reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
RANGE-OF-MOTION EXERCISE FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Range-of-motion exercise is recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Exercise, Exercise
Therapy; bicipital tendinosis, bicipital tendinopathy, shoulder pain, ruptured bicipital
tendon, biceps tendon tear; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 988 articles in PubMed, 38641 in Scopus, 481 in CINAHL, 495 in
Cochrane Library, 553 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 0 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
STRENGTHENING EXERCISE FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Strengthening exercise is recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Exercise, Exercise
Therapy; bicipital tendinosis, bicipital tendinopathy, shoulder pain, ruptured bicipital
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

207

tendon, biceps tendon tear; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 988 articles in PubMed, 38641 in Scopus, 481 in CINAHL, 495 in
Cochrane Library, 553 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 0 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
AEROBIC EXERCISE FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Aerobic exercise is recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Exercise, Exercise
Therapy; bicipital tendinosis, bicipital tendinopathy, shoulder pain, ruptured bicipital
tendon, biceps tendon tear; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 988 articles in PubMed, 38641 in Scopus, 481 in CINAHL, 495 in
Cochrane Library, 553 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 0 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

208

MEDICATIONS
Bicipital tendinopathy treatment recommendations largely require inference from RCTs
(other than for injections and surgery, see below), as quality studies are not currently
available. Thus, all of these inferential recommendations are listed as “Insufficient Evidence
(I)” with low levels of confidence. See also the Indications, Harms, Benefits,
Frequency/Dose/Duration, Indications for Discontinuation, and Rationale in the Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathies recommendations.
NSAIDS FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
NSAIDs are recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAID); COX-2 inhibitors, ketorolac, ibuprofen, dexketoprofen,
celecoxib, parecoxib, rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis, bicipital tendinosis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 185 articles in PubMed, 599 in Scopus, 31 in
CINAHL, 42 in Cochrane Library, 46 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 8 from PubMed, 7 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane
Library, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 18 articles considered for
inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ACETAMINOPHEN FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Acetaminophen is recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

209

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Acetaminophen,
paracetamol; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis, bicipital tendinosis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 38 articles in PubMed, 1810 in Scopus, 20 in
CINAHL, 20 in Cochrane Library, 148 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 4 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
CAPSICUM FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Capsicum is recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Topical Creams;
bicipital tendinosis, bicipital tendinopathy, shoulder pain, ruptured bicipital tendon, biceps
tendon tear; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 1 article in PubMed, 552 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 2 in Cochrane Library, 23 in
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0
from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources. Of the 1 article considered for inclusion, 0 randomized trials and 1 systematic
review met the inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

210

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
GABAPENTIN FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of gabapentin for the treatment of
bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
TOPICAL NSAIDS FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of topical NSAIDs for the treatment of
bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Topical NSAIDS;
bicipital tendinosis, bicipital tendinopathy, shoulder pain, ruptured bicipital tendon, biceps
tendon tear; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 187 articles in PubMed, 931 in Scopus, 14 in CINAHL, 6 in Cochrane Library, 62 in
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0
from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

211

LIDOCAINE PATCHES FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of lidocaine patches for the treatment of
bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Lidocaine Patches;
bicipital tendinosis, bicipital tendinopathy, shoulder pain, ruptured bicipital tendon, biceps
tendon tear; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 2 articles in PubMed, 684 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 35 in
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 2 from PubMed, 0
from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SYSTEMIC ORAL STEROIDS FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Systemic oral steroids are not recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low

ELECTRICAL THERAPIES
Bicipital tendinopathy treatment recommendations largely require inference from RCTs
(other than for injections and surgery, see below), as quality studies are not currently
available. Thus, all of these inferential recommendations are listed as “Insufficient Evidence
(I)” with low levels of confidence. See also the Indications, Harms, Benefits,
Frequency/Dose/Duration, Indications for Discontinuation, and Rationale in the Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathies recommendations.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

212

TRANSCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation is recommended for the treatment of bicipital
tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
ELECTRICAL MUSCLE STIMULATION FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of electrical muscle stimulation for the
treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
EXTRACORPOREAL SHOCKWAVE THERAPY FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Extracorporeal shockwave therapy is not recommended for the treatment of bicipital
tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low

HOT AND COLD THERAPIES
Bicipital tendinopathy treatment recommendations largely require inference from RCTs
(other than for injections and surgery, see below), as quality studies are not currently
available. Thus, all of these inferential recommendations are listed as “Insufficient Evidence
(I)” with low levels of confidence. See also the Indications, Harms, Benefits,
Frequency/Dose/Duration, Indications for Discontinuation, and Rationale in the Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathies recommendations.
HEAT THERAPIES FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Heat therapies are recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
COLD THERAPIES FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

213

Cold therapies are recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
DIATHERMY FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of diathermy for the treatment of
bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
INFRARED THERAPY FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of infrared therapy for the treatment of
bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low

ALLIED HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
Bicipital tendinopathy treatment recommendations largely require inference from RCTs
(other than for injections and surgery, see below), as quality studies are not currently
available. Thus, all of these inferential recommendations are listed as “Insufficient Evidence
(I)” with low levels of confidence. See also the Indications, Harms, Benefits,
Frequency/Dose/Duration, Indications for Discontinuation, and Rationale in the Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathies recommendations.
ACUPUNCTURE FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Acupuncture is recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Acupuncture;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis,
bicipital tendinosis; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

214

reviewed 1 articles in PubMed, 1678 in Scopus, 127 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 275 in
Google Scholar, and 11 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 3
from Scopus, 2 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 11 from
other sources. Of the 17 articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trials and 0
systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANUAL THERAPY FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of manual therapy for the treatment of
bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
MOBILIZATION FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of mobilization for the treatment of
bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
MANIPULATION (SHOULDER) FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of shoulder manipulation for the
treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
BALNEOTHERAPY FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Balneotherapy is not recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

215

LOW-LEVEL LASER THERAPY FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Low-level laser therapy is not recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
INTERFERENTIAL THERAPY FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Interferential therapy is not recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
ULTRASOUND FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Ultrasound is not recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
MANIPULATION (NECK OR BACK) FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Manipulation of the neck or back is not recommended for the treatment of bicipital
tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low

DEVICES
Bicipital tendinopathy treatment recommendations largely require inference from RCTs
(other than for injections and surgery, see below), as quality studies are not currently
available. Thus, all of these inferential recommendations are listed as “Insufficient Evidence
(I)” with low levels of confidence. See also the Indications, Harms, Benefits,
Frequency/Dose/Duration, Indications for Discontinuation, and Rationale in the Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathies recommendations.
SLINGS AND SUPPORTS FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Slings and supports are not recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

216

Level of confidence Low
TAPING AND KINESIOTAPING FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Taping and kinesiotaping are not recommended for the treatment of bicipital
tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
MAGNETS FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Magnets are not recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
MAGNETIC STIMULATION FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Magnetic stimulation is not recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low

INJECTION THERAPIES
Glucocorticosteroid injections have been used for treatment of bicipital tendinopathy
(1037,1247-1250)
.
GLUCOCORTICOSTEROID INJECTIONS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC BICIPITAL
TENDINOPATHY
Recommended
Glucocorticosteroid injections are recommended for treatment of acute, subacute, and
chronic bicipital tendinopathy.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Moderate to severe pain from bicipital tendinopathy that is not satisfactorily controlled with
NSAID(s) or acetaminophen.
Benefits
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

217

Improved or resolved pain.
Harms
Steroid flare after an injection; rare infection, potential for tendon rupture, especially with
accidental intra-tendon injection, although the condition is associated with a baseline
degenerative tendon.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Single injection should be scheduled and results evaluated, rather than scheduling a series
of injections. If there are concerns about concomitant symptomatic rotator cuff
tendinopathy, then simultaneous double injections of the subacromial space and long head
of the biceps may be attempted (Wang, 2019). A second injection after waiting at least 2
weeks may be reasonable if the response is suboptimal or the tendon sheath region was felt
to have not been adequately addressed, though it would be appropriate to consider a
different technique or imaging. RCTs have utilized triamcinolone acetonide 40mg (Wang,
2019), triamcinolone acetate 40 mg (Yiannakopoulos et al., 2020), However, as the target
tissue space is relatively small in comparison with the subacromial space and there is
propensity for rupture, a low dose (e.g., methylprednisolone 10-20mg) is advised for an
initial injection. A higher dose may be advised if the results from the first injection are
inadequate.
Indications for discontinuation
A second glucocorticosteroid injection is not recommended if the first injection has resulted
in significant reduction or resolution of symptoms. If there are concerns about concomitant
symptomatic rotator cuff tendinopathy, then simultaneous double injections of the
subacromial space and long head of the biceps may be attempted (Wang, 2019). If there has
not been a response to a first injection, there is generally less indication for a second. If
there is reason to believe the medication was not well placed (e.g., no post-injection
anesthesia from the anesthetic) and/or if the underlying condition is so severe that one
steroid bolus could not be expected to adequately treat the condition, a second injection
may be indicated. There is evidence from two small randomized studies that ultrasound
guidance improves results (Yiannakopoulos et al., 2020) and accuracy (Hashiuchi et al.,
2011). Thus, the use of US guidance is both acceptable/recommended for coverage, but it is
also not essential.
Rationale
There are no placebo-controlled trials. There is one small-sized, moderate quality study
suggesting ultrasound guidance is helpful, but the evidence also suggests use of USguidance is not essential (Yiannakopoulos et al., 2020). Another RCT found greater accuracy
with US guidance, but included no medication (Hashiuchi et al., 2011); thus, whether the
results would be meaningfully different clinically was not determined. Injections are
invasive, have a low risk of adverse effects and are moderately costly. They are thought to

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

218

be effective for bicipital tendinopathy and thus are recommended. Due to risk of bicipital
rupture, which is common with this degenerative tendon problem, a low dose of steroid is
advised for an initial injection.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms:
Glucocorticosteroid Injections; bicipital tendinosis, bicipital tendinopathy, shoulder pain,
ruptured bicipital tendon, biceps tendon tear; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 7 articles in PubMed, 256 in Scopus, 0 in
CINAHL, 5 in Cochrane Library, 81 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 3 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 4 articles considered for
inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PLATELET-RICH PLASMA INJECTIONS FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of subacromial platelet-rich plasma (PRP)
injections for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathy.
[58.33% panel agreement on No Recommendation. 8.33% agreed with Recommended and
33.33% agreed with Not Recommended.]
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials of PRP injections. By analogy for the similar pathophysiological
condition of rotator cuff tendinopathy, the literature conflicts. Thus, there is no
recommendation for or against PRP injections for bicipital tendinopathy. The panel vote as
split as noted above.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

219

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Platelet-rich
Plasma Injections; bicipital tendinosis, bicipital tendinopathy, shoulder pain, ruptured
bicipital tendon, biceps tendon tear; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 178 articles in PubMed, 5760 in Scopus, 41 in CINAHL, 57 in
Cochrane Library, 98 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 1 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
STEM CELL INJECTIONS FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for stem cell therapy for bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies, and thus there is no recommendation regarding stem cell
therapy for bicipital tendinopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Stem cell
injections, stem cell therapy, stem cell, hematopoietic stem cells, hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation; bicipital tendinosis, bicipital tendinopathy, shoulder pain, ruptured bicipital
tendon, biceps tendon tear; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 34 articles in PubMed, 70 in Scopus, 13 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane
Library, 91 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 4 from
PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

220

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Surgery for select patients with bicipital tendon tears has been used to treat bicipital
tendinopathy (1174,1196,1198,1206,1251-1255).
Rotator cuff repair surgery has been performed at the same time as treatment for bicipital
tendinopathy (see Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy).
Tenodesis and tenotomy have been used for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathy with or
without rotator cuff tendinopathies (1168-1264).
SURGERY FOR SELECT PATIENTS WITH COMPLETE BICIPITAL TENDON TEARS
Sometimes Recommended
Surgery is recommended for select patients with complete bicipital tendon tears.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Rare patients with significant incapacity due to the tear, generally having very high
physically-demanding jobs, as the long head and bicipital tendon play a negligible role in the
dynamic stability and/or strength of the shoulder. Surgical procedure is usually tenodesis
and not repair.
Benefits
Primarily cosmetic. Less risk of popeye deformity after tenodesis than tenotomy (Castricini,
2018, MacDonald et al., 2020, De Carli et al., 2012, Cai et al., 2019, Woodmass et al., 2021),
including if combined with rotator cuff repair (Lee et al., 2016); however, earlier pain relief
has been reported from tenotomy (Belay et al., 2019, Zhang et al., 2015).
Harms
Risk of infection, pain associated with surgery, surgical complications. Increased risk of
humeral fracture.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
The most common reasons for revision surgery are reportedly pain, cramping and rerupture.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

221

Rationale
There are no RCTs comparing surgical with non-operative management. There are many
moderate quality trials comparing types of surgeries, especially comparing tenotomy and
tenodesis. There is no quality evidence that tenodesis is clearly superior to tenotomy,
although there is less risk of popeye deformity after tenodesis than tenotomy (Castricini,
2018, MacDonald et al., 2020, De Carli et al., 2012, Cai et al., 2019)(Woodmass et al., 2021),
including if combined with rotator cuff repair (Lee et al., 2016); however, earlier pain relief
has been reported from tenotomy (Belay et al., 2019, Zhang et al., 2015). Thus, there is no
recommendation of tenodesis compared with tenotomy.
The bicipital tendon is not required for function of the shoulder or arm and thus it generally
does not require surgical repair. The primary indications for surgical repair are related to
cosmesis, and potentially intolerable pain thought to be emanating from the bicipital
tendinopathy. Thus, surgical repair is not indicated for the vast majority of patients with
these ruptures and is selectively recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Surgery,
tenodesis, tenotomy; bicipital tendinosis, bicipital tendinopathy, shoulder pain, ruptured
bicipital tendon, biceps tendon tear; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 2818 articles in PubMed, 73581 in Scopus, 580 in CINAHL, 430 in
Cochrane Library, 97 in Google Scholar, and 12 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 6 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 12 from other sources. Of the 18 articles considered for inclusion, 11
randomized trials and 5 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ROTATOR CUFF REPAIR WITH BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHY
No Recommendation
Rotator cuff repair surgery has been performed at the same time as treatment for bicipital
tendinopathy. (See Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy.)
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

222

Level of confidence Low
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Rotator Cuff
Repair; bicipital tendinosis, bicipital tendinopathy, shoulder pain, ruptured bicipital tendon,
biceps tendon tear; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 275 articles in PubMed, 12850 in Scopus, 61 in CINAHL, 65 in Cochrane Library,
559 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from
PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Of the 1 article considered for inclusion, 0 randomized trial and 1
systematic review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
TENODESIS OR TENOTOMY FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHY WITH ROTATOR CUFF TEARS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for tenodesis or tenotomy for treatment of long head of the
biceps tendinopathy in combination with rotator cuff tears.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are multiple trials comparing tenodesis with tenotomy for treatment of biceps
tendinopathies with or without cuff tears. The literature shows no significant differences
between the two approaches (Belay et al., 2019, Castricini, 2018, Hufeland, 2019, Lee et al.,
2016, Zhang et al., 2015, Mardani-Kivi et al., 2019, De Carli et al., 2012) and between high
vs. subpectoral tenodesis (Franceschetti, 2020) and suprapectoral vs. open subpectoral
tenodesis (Forsythe, 2020). There also is no difference at 4-years between detaching or not
detaching the bicipital tendon (Franceschi, 2007). Thus, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Tenodesis; rotator

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

223

cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 113 articles
in PubMed, 1391 in Scopus, 65 in CINAHL, 18 in Cochrane Library, 189 in Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 50 from PubMed, 9 from Scopus, 0
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of
the 60 articles considered for inclusion, 7 randomized trials and 6 systematic reviews met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Biceps Tenotomy;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 94 articles in
PubMed, 926 in Scopus, 29 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 94 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 3 from PubMed, 5 from Scopus, 0 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 8
articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 2 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

REHABILITATION PROGRAMS
Bicipital tendinopathy treatment recommendations largely require inference from RCTs
(other than for injections and surgery, see below), as quality studies are not currently
available. Thus, all of these inferential recommendations are listed as “Insufficient Evidence
(I)” with low levels of confidence. See also the Indications, Harms, Benefits,
Frequency/Dose/Duration, Indications for Discontinuation, and Rationale in the Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathies recommendations.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

224

POSTOPERATIVE REHABILITATION FOR BICIPITAL TENDINOPATHIES
Recommended
Postoperative rehabilitation is recommended for the treatment of bicipital tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Physical Therapy;
bicipital tendinosis, bicipital tendinopathy, shoulder pain, ruptured bicipital tendon, biceps
tendon tear; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 1,527 articles in PubMed, 15,173 in Scopus, 227 in CINAHL, 509 in Cochrane
Library, 519 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 2
from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 5 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 2 articles considered for inclusion, 0 randomized
trials and 1 systematic review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

FOLLOW-UP VISITS
Patients with bicipital tendinopathies usually require follow-up appointments, particularly if
they are undergoing active treatment(s), need assistance with advancing a course of
exercises, and/or require significant work limitations that need frequent adjustments.
Frequencies of appointments may also be greater when more workplace limitations are
required and job demands are greater. The rare patients with bicipital tears who undergo
surgical repair may require at least several weeks to a couple months of post-operative
rehabilitation. Patients with bicipital tears managed non-operatively may require longer
duration limitations and slower recovery may occur, particularly if there is concomitant
rotator cuff tendinopathy. In those cases, the patient may require therapy on a prolonged
basis in order to recover as much function as possible.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

225

SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS (GLENOHUMERAL AND ACROMIOCLAVICULAR
JOINT)
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The following section contains recommendations for evaluating and managing Shoulder
Osteoarthrosis from the Evidence-Based Shoulder Disorders Panel. These recommendations
are based on critically appraised higher-quality research evidence or, when such evidence
was unavailable or inconsistent, on expert consensus as required in ACOEM’s Methodology.
Recommendations are made under the following categories:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Strongly Recommended, “A” Level
Moderately Recommended, “B” Level
Recommended, “C” Level
Insufficient – Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – No Recommendation (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – Not Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Not Recommended, “C” Level
Moderately Not Recommended, “B” Level
Strongly Not Recommended, “A” Level

OVERVIEW
The shoulder joints are substantially less likely to be affected by osteoarthrosis (one type of
degenerative joint disease) than other joints such as the knees, hips, spine, or fingers. As
with other joints, there may be multiple diagnostic causes of the degenerative findings on xray, only one of which is osteoarthrosis. Careful evaluation is required to identify the correct
diagnosis. While most osteoarthrosis cases are not work related, some cases, especially
unilateral, ipsilateral post-occupational fracture-related arthroses, are thought to be
occupationally related.

WORK LIMITATIONS
Glenohumeral and AC joint osteoarthroses generally do not require work limitations.
Occasionally limitations are required in severe cases to preclude significant symptomatic
aggravation especially for more physically demanding work such as preventing overhead
use, lifting of more than 15 pounds, repeated forceful use, and/or avoidance of other
activities that significantly increase symptoms. Shoulder arthroplasty generally precludes
return to physically demanding work.

DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
A degenerative joint disease diagnosis requires non-radiating pain and degenerative findings
on x-ray. Confirming a diagnosis of osteoarthrosis requires attention to the history,
evaluation of other joints, and exclusion of other causes, such as inflammatory or crystal
arthropathies and rotator cuff tendinopathy and labral tears.

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
ANTIBODIES
There are numerous antibodies that are markers for specific inflammatory arthropathies
(e.g., rheumatoid factor, anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-Sm, anti-Ro, anti-La for rheumatoid
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

226

arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjogren’s, mixed connective tissue disorder, etc.)
(1265,1266)
. Patients with inflammatory arthropathies are at increased risk for degenerative
joint disease of the shoulder joints, as well as subacromial bursitis.
ANTIBODIES TO CONFIRM SPECIFIC DISORDERS
Sometimes Recommended
Antibody levels are selectively recommended to evaluate and diagnose patients with
shoulder pain that have reasonable suspicion of rheumatological disorders including
inflammatory arthropathies.
Antibody levels are strongly recommended as a screen to confirm specific rheumatological
disorders when there are indications (e.g., symptoms and/or signs suggestive of rheumatoid
arthritis), but are generally not indicated for most patients with other specific soft tissue
musculoskeletal disorders, such as rotator cuff tendinopathies due to high false positive
rates in that non-specific diagnostic setting. Consultation with a rheumatologist may be
helpful when there is a known or suspected disorder.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Shoulder pain and a presumptive diagnosis of an inflammatory rheumatological disorder.
May include pain that fails to respond as would be expected, with or without findings in
other joints. Findings in other joints increases the probability that testing will be positive.
Testing is generally not indicated for most patients with rotator cuff tendinopathies. Testing
is also not generally indicated at initial symptoms presentation unless symptoms have been
present for at least a few weeks and/or are severe; otherwise, e.g., negative test results are
more likely as insufficient time is likely to have passed and may mislead.
Benefits
Secure an accurate diagnosis, which should then focus the treatment plan to more
efficacious treatments.
Harms
Potential for false-positive tests; however that is generally minimal unless the pre-test
probability is low.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally only ordered one time. However, if the testing was performed early and there is
further disease persistence or progression, a second test is reasonable as more time may be
required for the antibody tests to become positive.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

227

Rationale
Elevated antibody levels are highly useful for confirming clinical impressions of
inflammatory rheumatological diseases. However, routine use of these tests in shoulder
pain patients is not recommended, especially as wide-ranging, non-focused test batteries
are likely to result in inaccurate diagnoses due to false positives and low pre-test
probabilities. Clinicians should also be aware that false-negative results occur.
Measurement of antibody levels is minimally invasive, unlikely to have substantial adverse
effects, and is low to moderately costly depending on the specific test ordered. They are
recommended for focused testing of a limited number of diagnostic considerations.
However, ordering of a large, diverse array of antibody levels without targeting a few
specific disorders diagnostically is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Antibodies;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive
value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 9 articles in
PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match
tab to find and review 9 articles, 676 in Scopus, 2 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 119 in
Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0
from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from
other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

C-REACTIVE PROTEIN
There are many markers of inflammation that may be measured serologically in patients (352361)
. These include C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), aldolase,
interleukins, ferritin, and an elevated total protein-albumin gap. These non-specific
inflammatory markers may be helpful in evaluating patients with shoulder degenerative
joint diseases (1267-1278).
NON-SPECIFIC INFLAMMATORY MARKERS FOR SCREENING FOR INFLAMMATORY
DISORDERS IN SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN
Sometimes Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

228

Serum measures of erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, creatine kinase
muscle, aldolase, hyaluronic acid, and other inflammatory markers are selectively
recommended for screening either inflammatory disorders with reasonable suspicion of
inflammatory disorder in patients with subacute or chronic shoulder pain or osteoarthrosis.
They are generally not indicated for patients with non-specific disorders, such as rotator cuff
tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Shoulder pain and a presumption of an inflammatory process. Pain that fails to respond as
would be expected, with or without findings in other joints. Findings in other joints
increases the probability that testing will be positive. Testing is generally not indicated for
most patients with rotator cuff tendinopathies. Testing is also not generally indicated at
initial symptoms presentation unless symptoms have been present for at least a few weeks
and/or are severe; otherwise, e.g., negative test results are more likely as insufficient time is
likely to have passed and may mislead.
Benefits
Identify whether an inflammatory process is likely, which may help focus on the need for
further testing to secure an accurate diagnosis.
Harms
Potential for false-positive tests; however, that is generally minimal unless the pre-test
probability is low.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally only ordered one time. However, if the testing was performed early, and there is
further disease persistence or progression, a second test is reasonable as the inflammatory
mediators may have needed additional time to become positive.
Rationale
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is the most commonly used systemic marker for nonspecific inflammation. It is elevated in numerous inflammatory conditions including
rheumatological disorders as well as infectious diseases. C-reactive protein (CRP) is a marker
of systemic inflammation that has been associated with an increased risk of coronary artery
disease. It is also a non-specific marker for other inflammation. Both ESR and CRP are also
markers of infection. Numerous inflammatory markers have been found to be elevated in
patients with musculoskeletal disorders but because it is not known whether these factors
precede or are a consequence of the disease processes, their utility in patient management

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

229

is unclear. Other non-specific markers of inflammation include elevated ferritin and an
elevated protein-albumin gap, neither of which have known clinical roles. Serological studies
for non-specific inflammatory markers are minimally invasive, have low risk of adverse
effects, and are low cost. They are recommended as a reasonable screen for systemic
inflammatory conditions especially if the patient also has other pain without clear definition
of a diagnosis or those with fibromyalgia or myofascial pain syndrome, although specificity is
not high. However, ordering of a large, diverse array of anti-inflammatory markers without
targeting a few specific disorders diagnostically is not recommended.
A large study found elevated biomarkers (C-reactive protein, creatine kinase muscle,
aldolase) are associated with osteoarthrosis compared with normal controls (Ganguly,
2019). Another study found elevated serum hyaluronic acid levels among both those with
either rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthrosis, although the HA levels were higher among
those with rheumatoid arthritis (Goldberg RL, 1991) and TNF alpha, IL-1B, IL-10 and IL-17
(Hussein et al., 2008). However, clear distinctions between these measures among those
with osteoarthrosis and inflammatory arthropathies is not apparent in the available
literature. Thus, the utility of these tests may be as potential screening for arthropathies
irrespective of inflammatory arthroses.
A high-quality, 7-year study of 880 elderly subjects evaluated impacts of IL-6 and CRP on
both cross-sectional associations with morbidity and long-term mortality (Taaffe DR, 2000).
CRP and IL-6 were higher among smokers at baseline and those with higher body mass
indexes (BMIs). IL-6 and CRP were also higher among those with hypertension, myocardial
infarction, stroke, glycosylated hemoglobin levels, HDL, and number of chronic conditions.
Both IL-6 and CRP were inversely related to quartiles of moderate and strenuous physical
activity. CRP and/or IL-6 were associated with incidence of hypertension, myocardial
infarction, diabetes, and incident cases of chronic conditions. Physical performance
measures of changes in grip strength, signature time, chair-rise and 6-m fast walk all were
not significant for IL-6 or CRP.
Serological studies for non-specific inflammatory markers are minimally invasive, have low
risk of adverse effects, and are low cost. They are recommended as a screen for systemic
inflammatory and osteoarthrosis conditions especially if the patient also has other pain
without clear definition of a diagnosis, although specificity is not high and these measures
tend to be elevated in both osteoarthrosis and inflammatory disorders, with higher levels
among those with inflammatory disorders. However, ordering of a large, diverse array of
anti-inflammatory markers without targeting a few specific disorders diagnostically is not
recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: blood
sedimentation, c reactive protein, procalcitonin, nonspecific inflammatory markers;
osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular
joint; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative
predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 6

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

230

articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using
Best Match tab to find and review 6 articles, 756 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 11,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. We considered for inclusion 0
from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 6 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 8 articles considered for inclusion, 5 diagnostic
studies and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria. †
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Cytokines;
osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular
joint; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative
predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 12
articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using
Best Match tab to find and review 12 articles, 1030 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane
Library, 12,000 in Google Scholar, and 0from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria. †
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: C-Reactive
Protein, Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate, Non-Specific Inflammatory Markers; rotator cuff
tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement
syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; diagnosis,
diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value,
predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 35 articles in PubMed
using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to
find and review 37 articles, 61 in Scopus, 10 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane Library, 171 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

X-RAYS
X-ray is the most basic anatomical test for arthritides and degenerative joint disease
(50,610,1279-1281)
. Osteoarthrosis is characterized by four chief features on x-ray: joint space
narrowing, subchondral bone sclerosis, marginal osteophytes, and subchondral cysts (1282).
The differential diagnosis for degenerative joint disease includes gout, pseudogout,
hydroxyapatite deposition disease, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, etc., which may or may
not have differences with findings from osteoarthrosis-related degenerative joint disease.
American College of Radiography guidelines have been published (1283,1284).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

231

X-RAYS FOR EVALUATION OF SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS
Recommended
X-rays are recommended for evaluation of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain and
arthritis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Most patients with shoulder pain are candidates for x-rays, especially for significant trauma,
pain without trending towards improvement, impaired use, and those with red flags. Age
has been found to be a potent predictor of increased degenerative changes found on x-ray
in the acromioclavicular joint (Bonsell et al., 2000), and changes in the critical angle
combined with age have been found to predict glenohumeral pathology. Reportedly, x-ray
has been helpful for diagnosing os acromiale in shoulder pain patients who were otherwise
thought to not have the condition (Burbank et al., 2008).
Benefits
Defining the presence and severity of degenerative joint disease. Diagnosis of a fracture,
calcific tendinitis, erosive lesions, or otherwise latent medical condition(s) to assist with
narrowing the differential diagnosis.
Harms
Medicalization or worsening of otherwise benign shoulder condition; minor radiation
exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining x-rays once is generally sufficient with two to three views. For patients with
chronic shoulder pain, it may be reasonable to obtain a second set of x-rays later to reevaluate the patient’s condition, particularly if symptoms change.
Rationale
X-rays are helpful to evaluate most patients with shoulder pain, both to diagnose and to
assist with the differential diagnostic possibilities such as arthroses. X-rays are particularly
helpful for diagnosis of calcific tendinitis, which results in different treatment options.
Glenohumeral arthrosis is also more likely if there is a full-thickness rotator cuff tear
(Gartsman et al., 1997). Plain radiographic findings are used to stage disease involvement in
osteonecrosis or humeral avascular necrosis. X-rays are non-invasive, low to moderate
costly, and have little risk of adverse effects, and therefore are recommended.
Evidence
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

232

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Roentgenograms,
X-Rays; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint,
acromioclavicular joint; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and
reviewed 1,148 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 1,148 articles, 1,530 in Scopus, 3 in
CINAHL, 5 in Cochrane Library, 15,800 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 2 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 4 articles considered for
inclusion, 3 diagnostic studies and 1 systematic review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SHOULDER ARTHROSCOPY
Arthroscopy has been used for diagnosis and as part of a therapeutic surgical treatment
(79,624-628,1285-1290)
.
DIAGNOSTIC ARTHROSCOPIC SURGERY FOR OSTEOARTHROSIS
Not Recommended
Diagnostic arthroscopy is not recommended for diagnostic evaluation of patients with
osteoarthrosis. However, there are other indications for arthroscopy.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
Arthroscopy is performed nearly universally in a context of a pre-operative diagnosis that is
believed to be a treatable abnormality, rather than merely for diagnostic purposes (Dinnes
et al., 2003, Fouse et al., 2007, Abrams, 2006, Baker et al., 2003, Ahmad et al., 2004,
Boszotta et al., 2004). There is no arthroscopic treatment shown to be effective for
osteoarthrosis; thus, arthroscopy for osteoarthrosis is not recommended. However, there
are other indications for arthroscopy (e.g., significant labral tear).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Shoulder

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

233

Arthroscopy; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint,
acromioclavicular joint; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and
reviewed 305 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 305 articles, 4,956 in Scopus, 1 in CINAHL,
183 in Cochrane Library, 30,200 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 3 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 6 articles considered for
inclusion, 4 diagnostic studies and 1 systematic review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

BONE SCANS
Bone scans involve intravenous administration of Technetium Tc-99m that is preferentially
concentrated in areas of metabolic activity (turnover) in bone. The radioactivity is then
detected by a large sensor and converted into skeletal images showing the increased
uptake. There are many causes for abnormal radioactive uptake; thus, positive bone scans
are not highly specific (1291-1294).
BONE SCANNING FOR SELECT USE IN ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PAIN AND
OSTEOARTHROSIS
Sometimes Recommended
Bone scanning is selectively recommended for evaluation of patients with osteoarthrosis,
particularly where there is more than one joint to be evaluated in patients with acute,
subacute, or chronic pain to assist in the diagnosis of osteonecrosis or other conditions with
increased bone metabolism.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Shoulder pain with suspicion of osteonecrosis or other increased polyostotic bone
metabolism in multiple joints and bones or acromioclavicular joint pain. This includes
suspicion of multiple myeloma, metastases, infection, inflammatory arthropathies, fracture,
or other significant bone trauma.
Benefits

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

234

Diagnosis of osteonecrosis, multiple myeloma, metastases, infection, inflammatory
arthropathies, fracture, other significant bone trauma, or other increased polyostotic bone
metabolism in multiple joints and bones or acromioclavicular joint pain.
Harms
Some radiation exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining bone scans once is generally sufficient. For rare patients with chronic shoulder
pain, or a disorder with a need to track activity (e.g., cancer), it may be reasonable to obtain
a subsequent bone scan to re-evaluate the patient’s condition, particularly if symptoms
change.
Rationale
Bone scanning may be a helpful diagnostic test to evaluate suspected metastases (multiple
sites), infected bone (osteomyelitis), inflammatory arthropathies, and trauma (e.g., occult
fractures), particularly if MRI is not available or is contraindicated. It may be helpful in those
with suspected, early osteonecrosis (avascular necrosis) without x-ray changes. In cases
where the diagnosis is felt to be secure, there is no indication for bone scanning as it does
not alter the treatment or management. Bone scanning is minimally invasive, has minimal
potential for adverse effects (essentially equivalent to a blood test), but is high cost.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Bone Scan, bone
scintigraphy; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint,
acromioclavicular joint; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and
reviewed 57 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 57 articles, 1,640 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL,
458 in Cochrane Library, 5,580 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered
for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1
from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 1 article considered for inclusion, 1
diagnostic study and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

235

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (CT)
Computerized tomography remains an important imaging procedure, particularly for bony
anatomy, whereas MRI is superior for soft tissue abnormalities. However, most shoulder
pain patients have issues with soft tissue rather than bony abnormalities in the shoulder
(1295,1296)
; thus, on a population-basis, far fewer CT scans are ordered. CT may nevertheless
be useful for shoulder joint abnormalities where advanced imaging of the bones is required
(i.e., complex proximal humerus fracture, scapular fracture). CT also may be useful to
evaluate the anatomy in patients with contraindications for MRI (most typically an
implanted metallic-ferrous device). CT arthrogram is often preferred when evaluating
posterior or anterior glenohumeral instability when the bony anatomy needs to be better
defined – glenoid deficiency and humeral Hill-Sachs – as MRI is not as good for bone
imaging. CT arthrogram can be used in place of MRI to evaluate for rotator cuff tear.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (CT) FOR EVALUATION OF OSTEOARTHROSIS
Not Recommended
Computerized tomography is not recommended for the evaluation of osteoarthrosis. There
are other indications for CT.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
CT is particularly used to evaluate osseous structures; however, x-rays suffice for the vast
majority of patients with osteoarthrosis and it is thus not recommended. There are other
indications for CT, including preoperative planning (Scalise et al., 2008).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Computerized
Tomography, CT; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint,
acromioclavicular joint; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and
reviewed 300 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 300 articles, 2,423 in Scopus, 68 in CINAHL,
1,420 in Cochrane Library, 20,000 in Google Scholar, and 0from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 2 articles considered for
inclusion, 2 diagnostic studies and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

236

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

HELICAL CT
HELICAL CT FOR EVALUATION OF OSTEOARTHROSIS
Not Recommended
Helical CT is not recommended for the evaluation of osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
There is no quality evidence that helical CT scans help in the diagnosis of shoulder
osteoarthrosis and thus they are not recommended. There are other indications for helical
CT scans.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Helical CT Scans,
tomography, spiral computed tomography; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease,
shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity,
specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests,
efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 3 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and
we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 0 articles, 60
in Scopus 0 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 2,910 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 3 articles
considered for inclusion, 2 diagnostic studies and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

LOCAL ANESTHETIC INJECTIONS
Diagnostic injections particularly of the subacromial space, glenohumeral joint and
acromioclavicular joint are sometimes performed. However, they are nearly always
performed in combination with a therapeutic intervention, such as a glucocorticosteroid
injection. Injection with a therapeutic agent is nearly always preferable due to less overall
invasiveness with 1 injection rather than 2, as well as the potential to assess the patient
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

237

both immediately post-injection for diagnostic purposes as well as longer term for
therapeutic purposes.
See Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy Injections.

FUNCTIONAL CAPACITY EVALUATIONS
FUNCTIONAL CAPACITY EVALUATIONS FOR CHRONIC DISABLING SHOULDER PAIN
Recommended
Functional capacity evaluations (FCEs) are recommended as an option for evaluation of
disabling chronic shoulder pain where the information may be helpful to attempt to
objectify worker capability, function, motivation, and effort vis-à-vis either a specific job or
general job requirements. There are circumstances where a patient is not progressing as
anticipated at 6 to 8 weeks and an FCE may help evaluate functional status and patient
performance in order to match performance to specific job demands, particularly in
instances where those demands are medium to heavy. If a clinician is comfortable
describing work ability without an FCE, there is no requirement to do this testing.
Recordings or observation for signs of mismatch between effort and self-reported abilities
may be particularly helpful.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Patients with moderate to severe chronic shoulder pain that has ongoing functional
impairments and need to attempt to identify and quantify limitations. There are
circumstances where a patient is not progressing as anticipated at 6 to 8 weeks and an FCE
can evaluate functional status and patient performance in order to match performance to
specific job demands, particularly in instances where those demands are medium to heavy.
More typically, FCEs are useful after a healing plateau is established whether surgery was
performed or not. If a clinician is comfortable describing work ability without an FCE, there
is no requirement to do this testing. Recordings or observation for signs of mismatch
between effort and self-reported abilities may be particularly helpful.
Benefits
Identification and enumeration of limitations. Assess functional abilities and may facilitate
greater confidence in return to work.
Harms
Inappropriately low estimates of abilities, self-limitation of efforts, excessive disability,
inappropriately precluding the performance of tasks and activities the person could safely
perform. Medicalization, worsening of shoulder pain with testing; may have misleading
results that understate capabilities.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

238

Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally, only one test is needed. A repeat FCE may be needed if there are substantial
changes in the person’s condition or status, or if there is a need to assess projected
performance against a different set of job criteria.
Rationale
There are no quality studies of FCEs to evaluate ability to perform work and/or work
limitations. Yet, FCEs are one of the few means to attempt to objectify limitations and are
frequently used in workers’ compensation systems, particularly as the correlation between
clinical pain ratings and functional abilities appears weak (Brouwer et al., 2005, Gross et al.,
2003, Reneman et al., 2002, Reneman et al., 2007, Schiphorst Preuper et al., 2008, Smeets
et al., 2007, Eriksen et al., 2006). However, obtaining objective data regarding shoulder
problems is somewhat more challenging than for distal upper extremity-related
impairments due to the degree of reliance on the patient’s subjective willingness to exert or
sustain major activities that are critical for job performance. Because their reliability and
validity have not been proven, FCEs should be utilized to evaluate work ability about what a
patient was willing to do on a given day. They should be carefully performed and
interpreted, but FCEs should not be used to override the judgment about the work ability of
a patient with a shoulder problem.
Many commercial FCE models are available. There is research regarding inter-and intra-rater
reliability for some of the models (complete discussion is beyond the scope of this
guideline). The validity of FCEs, particularly predictive validity, is more difficult to determine,
since factors other than physical performance may affect return to work (Pransky et al.,
2004, Gouttebarge et al., 2004). An FCE may be done for one or more reasons, including
identifying an individual’s ability to perform specific job tasks associated with a job (jobspecific FCE) and physical activities associated with any job (general FCE), or to assist in the
objectification of the degree(s) of impairment(s). The type of FCE needed, and any other
issues the FCE evaluator needs to address, should be specified when requesting an FCE.
The term “capacity” used in FCE may be misleading, since an FCE generally measures an
individual’s voluntary performance rather than his or her capacity. Physical performance is
affected by psychosocial as well as physical factors. The extent of an individual’s
performance should be evaluated as part of the FCE process through analysis of his or her
level of physical effort (based on physiological and biomechanical changes during activity)
and consistency of performance. Perhaps more importantly, the objective findings identified
in the musculoskeletal evaluation should correlate with any identified functional deficits.
The individual’s performance level, especially as it relates to stated levels of performance,
should be discussed in the FCE report. A properly performed and well-reported FCE will
highlight such discrepancies. This is particularly important in shoulder evaluations where
there may be greater degrees of impairments at stake and where there are somewhat fewer
metrics available than for the distal upper extremity.
FCE test components may vary depending on the model used, but most contain the
following:

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

239

●
Patient interview including: informed consent, injury/illness and medical history,
current symptoms, activities and stated limitations, pain ratings/disability questionnaires
●
Musculoskeletal examination (e.g., including analogues of Waddell’s non-organic
signs for the shoulder such as non-anatomic pain)
●
Observations throughout the session (e.g., demonstrated sitting tolerance, pain
modifying behaviors)
●
Material handling tests (lifting, carrying, pushing, pulling)
●
Movement tests (walking, crouching, kneeling, reaching, etc.)
●
Positional tolerance tests
●
Dexterity/hand function
●
Static strength (varies among models)
●
Aerobic fitness (usually submaximal test-also variable among models)
●
Job-specific activities as relevant
●
Reliability of client reporting (e.g., non-organic signs, pain questionnaires, placebo
tests, etc.)
●
Physical effort testing (e.g., Jamar Dynamometer maximum voluntary effort, bell
curve analysis, rapid exchange grip, competitive test performance, heart rate, observation
of clinical inconsistencies, etc.)
FCE test length may vary between FCE models, although most 1-day FCEs are completed in 3
to 4 hours. Two-day tests, where the patient is seen on 2 consecutive days, may be
recommended when there are problems with fatigue (e.g., chronic fatigue syndrome),
delayed onset of symptoms, unusually complex job demands to simulate, and questions
about symptom validity. Test length for 2-day tests is generally 3 to 4 hours on the first day,
and 2 to 3 hours on the second day.
Interpretation of FCE results is complicated in that it is a measure of voluntary performance.
Before beginning testing, the patient is counseled to avoid doing anything to knowingly
reinjure him or herself. Thus, “fear avoidance” may cause testing to seriously underestimate
actual ability and result in a report that the patient had “self-limited performance due to
pain,” suggesting a low pain tolerance, when in reality the patient was doing what he or she
was instructed.
By analogy, the best studies on the ability of FCEs to predict safe re-entry to the workplace
following rehabilitation of work-related back pain/injury suggest that FCEs are not able to
predict safe return to work (concurrent validity) (Gross et al., 2005, Gross et al., 2004, Gross
et al., 2004). In a prospective cohort study of 1,438 consecutive work-related back patients,
all underwent an FCE prior to return to work. In the control group, the FCE was used to
write return-to-work guidelines, while in the study group it was ignored and the worker was
returned usually to full duty. Ignoring the FCE improved outcome (Hall et al., 1994).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Functional
Capacity Evaluations; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

240

injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and
reviewed 6 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 34 articles, 42 in Scopus, 8,289 in CINAHL,
11 in Cochrane Library, 334 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered
for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0
from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (MRI)
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is often used as a secondary test after x-ray for many
shoulder joint problems since it tends to be helpful for imaging soft tissues, particularly the
rotator cuff (175,207,656-666,1297-1309).
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (MRI) FOR EVALUATION OF OSTEOARTHROSIS
Not Recommended
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is not recommended for the evaluation of osteoarthrosis
of either the glenohumeral or acromioclavicular joint. There are other indications for MRI.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
MRI is particularly used to evaluate soft tissue. X-rays suffice for the vast majority of
patients with osteoarthrosis. There is no quality evidence that MRI adds diagnostic value to
that of x-ray for osteoarthrosis. Thus, MRI is not recommended. There are other indications
for MRI.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Magnetic
Resonance Imaging, MRI; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral
joint, acromioclavicular joint; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and
reviewed 208 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 208 articles, 2,682 in Scopus, 1 in CINAHL,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

241

1 in Cochrane Library, 28,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered
for inclusion 7 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 2
from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 9 articles considered for inclusion, 8
diagnostic studies and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ARTHROGRAPHY
Arthrography involves the injection of contrast into the joint. It was modified in the 1970s to
include injection of air (“double contrast”) (614). Arthrography under fluoroscopy in isolation
has now been almost entirely replaced by other procedures, including MRI and MR
arthrography, primarily due to its low sensitivity for full-thickness tears and essentially no
sensitivity for partial-thickness tears (728). Most arthrograms including MR arthrogram and
CT arthrogram are performed using fluoroscopy to localize the joint and inject the contrast
agent (1310-1312).
ARTHROGRAPHY FOR EVALUATION OF OSTEOARTHROSIS
Not Recommended
Arthrography is not recommended for the evaluation of shoulder osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
There is no quality evidence of the utility of arthrography for diagnosing osteoarthrosis and
thus it is not recommended as a standalone diagnostic procedure. However, there are
indications for arthrography combined with advanced imaging (e.g., MRA).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Arthrography;
osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular
joint; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative
predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 77
articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using
Best Match tab to find and review 77 articles, 1,433 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 164 in Cochrane
Library, 9,290 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 2
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

242

Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 3 articles considered for inclusion, 1 diagnostic
study and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE ARTHROGRAM (MRA)
Magnetic resonance (MR) arthrography combines an MRI with an arthrogram to overcome
limitations of each test and is usually performed in preference to CT arthrography unless
bony structure definition is needed as well (705,706). MR arthrography is particularly thought
to be effective for imaging labral pathology (148,385,707-712,1313,1314).
MAGNETIC RESONANCE ARTHROGRAPHY (MRA) FOR EVALUATING OSTEOARTHROSIS
Not Recommended
Magnetic resonance arthrography (MRA) is not recommended for evaluating osteoarthrosis.
However, there are other indications for MRA.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Rationale
Magnetic resonance arthrography is particularly used to evaluate select soft tissues such as
labral tears. X-rays suffice for most patients with osteoarthrosis and thus MRA is not
recommended. There are other indications for MRA.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Magnetic
Resonance Arthrogram; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral
joint, acromioclavicular joint; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and
reviewed 30 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 30 articles, 58 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 2 in
Cochrane Library, 6,670 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 2 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from
Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources. Of the 4 articles considered for inclusion, 4
diagnostic studies and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

243

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ULTRASOUND
Diagnostic ultrasound has been used for evaluating rotator cuff tears (207,694,715-718) and has
been attempted for diagnosis of shoulder arthritis (1315).
ULTRASOUND FOR DIAGNOSING OSTEOARTHROSIS
Not Recommended
Ultrasound is not recommended for evaluating osteoarthrosis. There are other indications
for ultrasound.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Rationale
X-rays suffice for most patients with osteoarthrosis and thus ultrasound is not
recommended. There are other indications for ultrasound.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Ultrasound,
Ultrasonography, Ultrasonics, Doppler Ultrasonography; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint
disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint; diagnosis, diagnostic,
sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value
of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 1,115 articles in PubMed using Most
Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and
review 1,115 articles, 3246 in Scopus, 2 in CINAHL, 16,218 in Cochrane Library, 25,600 in
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0
from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

244

SINGLE PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT)
Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) is a 3-dimensional imaging
technique that has been useful in diagnosing osteoarthritis of the knee. It has been used to
diagnose osteoarthritis of the shoulder (1316).
SINGLE-PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT) FOR DIAGNOSING
OSTEOARTHROSIS
Not Recommended
Single-proton emission computed tomography (SPECT) is not recommended for the
evaluation of patients with osteoarthrosis. There are other indications for SPECT.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain including
osteoarthrosis. One study suggested abnormal findings in both osteoarthrosis and bursitis
and suggested the patterns of abnormalities provided diagnostic utility (Wandler et al.,
2005). Another study found PET identified abnormal areas (Nguyen et al., 2018). One study
found SPECT helpful in evaluating patients with inflammatory arthropathies, particularly if
there are concerns about the SI joints (Hanly, 1993). Some data suggest SPECT may
outperform bone scanning.
Additional studies are needed to determine if SPECT or PET adds something to the diagnosis,
treatment, and outcomes beyond that obtained by a careful history, physical examination,
plain x-rays, and clinical impression before it can be recommended for evaluating shoulder
disorders.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Single Photon
Emission Computed Tomography, SPECT; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease,
shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity,
specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests,
efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 3 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and
we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 3 articles, 32
in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 3,200 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

245

reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET)
Positron emission tomography (PET) is an imaging test that detects changes in metabolic
processes and has been used to diagnose osteoarthritis of the shoulder (1317,1318).
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET) FOR DIAGNOSING OSTEOARTHROSIS
Not Recommended
PET scanning is not recommended for the evaluation of patients with osteoarthrosis. There
are other indications for PET.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain including
osteoarthrosis. One study suggested abnormal findings in both osteoarthrosis and bursitis
and suggested the patterns of abnormalities provided diagnostic utility (Wandler et al.,
2005). Another study found PET identified abnormal areas (Nguyen et al., 2018). One study
found SPECT helpful in evaluating patients with inflammatory arthropathies, particularly if
there are concerns about the SI joints (Hanly, 1993). Some data suggest SPECT may
outperform bone scanning.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Positron Emission
Tomography, PET; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint,
acromioclavicular joint; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and
reviewed 10 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 10 articles, 243 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in
Cochrane Library, 3,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 2 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 2 articles considered for inclusion, 2
diagnostic studies and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria. †
†The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

246

review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
INITIAL CARE
Initial care of a patient with osteoarthrosis involves education. Identification of
accompanying disorders, such as rotator cuff tear, allows for treatment of an accompanying
condition to substantially reduce or resolve the symptoms. Over-the-counter (OTC)
analgesics have been used in the initial treatment of shoulder osteoarthrosis to manage
pain (1319-1339).
OVER-THE-COUNTER (OTC) ANALGESICS FOR TREATMENT OF OSTEOARTHROSIS
Recommended
Over-the-counter analgesics are recommended for treatment of osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Shoulder osteoarthrosis.
Benefits
Self-management of the pain.
Harms
Negligible for OTC analgesics unless acetaminophen doses exceed 3. 5g, or the patient has
liver disease or another condition.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Per manufacturer’s recommendations.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, lack of efficacy, intolerance, complication.
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating analgesics for managing shoulder osteoarthrosis.
However, analgesics and OTC NSAIDs are likely helpful and there is some quality evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

247

for the use of prescription NSAIDs for other shoulder nociceptive pain (see NSAIDs for
rotator cuff tendinopathy); thus, they are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: aspirin, naproxen,
paracetamol, diclofenac potassium, capsaicin, salicylates, lidocaine, diclofenac,
dexketoprofen, over the counter analgesic drugs, non-prescription analgesics, NSAIDs;
osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular
joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 9
articles in PubMed, 3,674 in Scopus, 1 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 21,300 in Google
Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 2 from PubMed, 15 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other
sources. Of the 18 articles considered for inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 11 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SELF-APPLICATION OF HEAT FOR TREATMENT OF OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the self-application of heat for treatment of
shoulder osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating heat or ice. Ice and heat applications do not appear to
materially affect a deep joint such as the shoulder, although a recommendation for selfapplications is not unreasonable. Thus, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Heat, Ice;

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

248

osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular
joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 3
articles in PubMed, 27 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 28,000 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SELF-APPLICATION OF ICE FOR TREATMENT OF OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the self-application of ice for treatment of
shoulder osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating heat or ice. Ice and heat applications do not appear to
materially affect a deep joint such as the shoulder, although a recommendation for selfapplications is not unreasonable. Thus, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Heat, Ice;
osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular
joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 3
articles in PubMed, 27 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 28,000 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

249

reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ACTIVITY MODIFICATION AND EXERCISE
EXERCISE FOR THE TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS
Recommended
See the exercise recommendations for rotator cuff tendinopathy.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence regarding the efficacy of exercise for treatment of shoulder
osteoarthrosis. There is quality evidence of efficacy regarding knee and hip osteoarthrosis,
which have indicated efficacy particularly of weight-bearing aerobic exercise and
strengthening exercises. Thus, there is a low threshold for use of exercise for treatment of
shoulder osteoarthrosis. Exercise is believed to be quite important for surgical
rehabilitation. Based on lack of quality data for shoulder osteoarthrosis (Guo, 2016), the
guidance for rotator cuff tendinopathy is advised to be used for shoulder osteoarthrosis
patients.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: exercise, exercise
therapy; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint,
acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 7 articles in PubMed, 7,696 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 15 in Cochrane Library, 44,700
in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed,
0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources. Of the 1 article considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

250

MEDICATIONS
Over-the-counter medications may be helpful to manage pain. These especially include
acetaminophen and NSAIDs (1340,1341). NSAIDs show greater efficacy, but overall
acetaminophen has a greater safety profile. Generally, the only medications commonly used
for osteoarthrosis patients are NSAIDs, but patients may require other medications postoperatively. Select patients may require the judicious use of opioids for pain management.
Other medications that have been used to treat osteoarthrosis include glucosamine,
chondroitin, and methylsulfonylmethane. Topical agents, such as capsaicin, have also been
utilized.
In the absence of quality evidence, it is recommended that the use of medications for
shoulder osteoarthrosis be managed according to the following recommendations for
Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy and Knee Osteoarthrosis:
●
NSAIDs for Treatment of Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies and Shoulder Pain [Strongly
Recommended, Evidence (A)]
●
Acetaminophen for Acute, Subacute, or Chronic Shoulder Pain [Recommended,
Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Acetaminophen for Perioperative or Postoperative Shoulder Pain [Recommended,
Evidence (C)]
●
Muscle Relaxants for for Acute or Subacute Shoulder Pain [Recommended,
Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibiting Anti-depressants for Subacute or Chronic
Shoulder Girdle Pain [Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors for Acute, Subacute, or Chronic Shoulder
Pain and Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Anti-convulsants for Acute, Subacute or Chronic Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathies [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Oral Glucocorticosteroids for Acute, Subacute, or Chronic Shoulder Pain or Rotator
Cuff Tendinopathies [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Capsicum Creams for Acute, Subacute, Chronic Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathy [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Topical Glyceryl Trinitrate, Lidocaine Patches, Eutectic Mixture of Local Anesthetics
(EMLA), and Other Creams/Ointments for Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy
[Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha Blockers for Osteoarthrosis or Acute, Subacute, or
Chronic Knee Pain or Other Non-inflammatory Knee Disorders [Not Recommended,
Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Glucosamine Sulfate, Chondroitin Sulfate, or Methylsulfonylmethane for Knee
Osteoarthrosis [No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
See also the ACOEM Opioids Guideline for recommendations and evidence on the treatment
of subacute and chronic pain.
Regarding alternative medicine, there are no recommendations for or against use of the
following for the treatment of acute, subacute, or chronic knee pain that may be
generalized to the shoulder: Willow bark (Salix), ginger extract, rose hips, camphora molmol,
maleluca alternifolia, angelica sinensis, aloe vera, thymus officinalis, menthe peperita,
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

251

arnica montana, curcuma longa, tancaetum parthenium, and zingiber officinicalis, avocado
soybean unsaponifiables, oral enzymes, topical copper salicylate, S-Adenosylmethionine, or
diacerein harpagoside.

DEVICES
Slings generally promote debility in osteoarthrosis and are believed to predispose towards
adhesive capsulitis; thus, they are not recommended to treat shoulder OA. However, the
use of slings and functional braces is frequently needed in the postoperative setting (947,1342).
SLINGS AND BRACES FOR TREATMENT OF OSTEOARTHROSIS
Not Recommended
Slings and braces are not recommended for the treatment of osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating slings and braces for managing non-operative
osteoarthrosis. There are trials in post-arthroplasty patients (Baumgarten et al., 2018).
However, slings and braces are not recommended as they promote debility, which is
thought to substantially increase the risk for adhesive capsulitis.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Slings, Braces;
osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular
joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 7
articles in PubMed, 819 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 5 in Cochrane Library, 2,320 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 1 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 2 articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 1 systematic
review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

252

MAGNETS AND MAGNETIC STIMULATION FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER
OSTEOARTHROSIS
Not Recommended
Magnets and magnetic stimulation are not recommended for treatment of shoulder
osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Rationale
There are no quality studies for the treatment of shoulder osteoarthrosis. Magnets and
magnetic stimulation have been evaluated in quality trials for other MSDs, including LBP and
found to be ineffective; thus, they are not recommended for treatment of shoulder
osteoarthrosis.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Magnets,
Magnetic Stimulation, Magnetics, Magnetic Field Therapy; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint
disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 83 articles in PubMed, 127 in
Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 17,700 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
TAPING FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS
Not Recommended
Taping is not recommended for treatment of shoulder osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

253

Rationale
There are no quality studies for the treatment of shoulder osteoarthrosis. Taping has been
evaluated in quality trials for other MSDs, including LBP and found to be ineffective; thus, it
is not recommended for treatment of shoulder osteoarthrosis.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: athletic tape,
kinesiology taping, taping, osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder,
glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed articles in 1 PubMed, 521 in Scopus, 0 in
CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 0 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ALLIED HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
Acupuncture has been used for treatment of patients with chronic shoulder osteoarthrosis
(1343,1344)
. It has most commonly been used as an adjunct to more efficacious treatments.
Manual therapy, mobilization, manipulation, and massage have been used to treat patients
with osteoarthrosis (1345-1347). Manual therapy has been used to treat osteoarthrosis of the
knee and hip, as well as the shoulder (1348-1350). Massage has been used to treat
glenohumeral osteoarthrosis (744,1351-1353). Mobilization has also been used to treat
osteoarthrosis (1354).
Various means of delivering heat and electrical therapies for purposes of distraction have
been utilized for treatment of osteoarthrosis, although no quality studies for treatment of
shoulder osteoarthrosis have been identified, including diathermy (1355-1358), infrared therapy
(1359)
, ultrasound (1273,1360), laser therapy (1361,1362), transcutaneous nerve stimulation
(TENS)(1363,1364), taping (163), magnetic stimulation (1365), and pulsed electromagnetic
frequency devices (1366).
ACUPUNCTURE FOR TREATMENT OF SELECT PATIENTS WITH CHRONIC OR POSTOPERATIVE OSTEOARTHROSIS
Sometimes Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

254

Acupuncture is recommended for select use in chronic shoulder pain or postoperative pain
only as an adjunct to more efficacious treatments.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
As a tertiary treatment if NSAIDs, active exercises, injections, and surgery (if indicated) fail
to resolve or sufficiently improve pain.
Benefits
Modest reduction in pain.
Harms
Rare needling of deep tissue, such as artery, lung, etc. and resultant complications. Use of
acupuncture may theoretically increase reliance on passive modality(ies) for chronic pain.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Frequency and duration pattern in the quality trial was weekly for 8 weeks. An initial trial of
4 appointments would appear reasonable in combination with a conditioning program of
aerobic and strengthening exercises. An additional 4 appointments should be tied to partial
incremental functional improvements in objective measures, for a total of 8. If acupuncture
is trialed in a patient, objective functional improvement should be demonstrated after 6
visits.
Indications for discontinuation
No functional gains demonstrated, resolution, intolerance, non-compliance including noncompliance with aerobic and strengthening exercises.
Rationale
The overall body of evidence for the use of acupuncture for the shoulder is relatively weak.
There is one moderate-quality trial that included patients with shoulder osteoarthrosis,
along with multiple other conditions, with some indication of efficacy of acupuncture
(Moore et al., 1976). There are multiple other trials involving chronic shoulder conditions
including rotator cuff tendinopathies with quality evidence suggesting some modest efficacy
(see Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies). Acupuncture is minimally invasive as typically performed,
has low adverse effects, is moderately costly depending on numbers of treatments, and is
recommended for select use in patients in whom other interventions, particularly if NSAIDs
and activity modifications are insufficient. Acupuncture is recommended to assist in
increasing functional activity levels more rapidly; the primary attention should remain on
the exercise program and document functional gain. In those not involved in an exercise

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

255

program, or who are non-compliant with graded increases in activity levels, this intervention
is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Acupuncture,
acupuncture therapy; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral
joint, acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 24 articles in PubMed, 1,668 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 5,643 in
Cochrane Library, 1,340 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 1 article considered for inclusion, 1
randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANUAL THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of manual therapy for patients with
osteoarthrosis of the shoulder. There are other indications for this treatment.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of manual therapy for patients with OA;
thus, there is no recommendation for or against its use.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Manual Therapy,
Musculoskeletal Manipulation; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder,
glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

256

prospective studies. We found and reviewed 17 articles in PubMed, 1,425 in Scopus, 0 in
CINAHL, 4 in Cochrane Library, 18,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 3 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 4 articles considered for
inclusion, 0 randomized trials and 4 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MASSAGE FOR TREATMENT OF OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of massage for patients with
osteoarthrosis of the shoulder. There are other indications for this treatment.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of massage for patients with OA; thus,
there is no recommendation for or against its use.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Massage,
Massage Therapy; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint,
acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 3 articles in PubMed, 8 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, in 822 Cochrane Library, 14,200 in
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 2
from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources. Of the 4 articles considered for inclusion, 0 randomized trials and 3
systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

257

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANIPULATION OR MOBILIZATION FOR TREATMENT OF OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of manipulation or mobilization for
patients with osteoarthrosis of the shoulder. There are other indications for these
treatments.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of manipulation or mobilization for
patients with OA; thus, there is no recommendation for or against their use.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Manipulation;
osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular
joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed
15 articles in PubMed, 513 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 25,900 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 1 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Mobilization, Joint
Mobilization; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint,
acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 28 articles in PubMed, 2,118 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 2,841 in Cochrane Library,
16,700 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from
PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Of the 2 articles considered for inclusion, 0 randomized trial and 0
systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

258

we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PERCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION (PENS) FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER
OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of percutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (PENS) for the treatment of shoulder joint osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of PENS for patients with OA; thus, there
is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: percutaneous
electrical nerve stimulation, PENS; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder,
glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0 articles in PubMed, 11 in Scopus, 0 in
CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 3,040 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SYMPATHETIC ELECTROTHERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of sympathetic electrotherapy for the
treatment of shoulder joint osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

259

Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of sympathetic electrotherapy for patients
with OA; thus, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Sympathetic
electrotherapy; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint,
acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 0 articles in PubMed, 0 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 742 in
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0
from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
IONTOPHORESIS FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of iontophoresis for the treatment of
shoulder joint osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of iontophoresis for patients with OA;
thus, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Iontophoresis;
osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

260

joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly,
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0
articles in PubMed, 57 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 1,650 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
HIGH-VOLTAGE GALVANIC STIMULATION FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER
OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of high-voltage galvanic stimulation for
the treatment of shoulder joint osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of high-voltage galvanic stimulation for
patients with OA; thus, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: High-voltage
galvanic stimulation; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral
joint, acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 0articles in PubMed, 2 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 188 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

261

review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MICROCURRENT STIMULATION FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of microcurrent stimulation for the
treatment of shoulder joint osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of microcurrent stimulation for patients
with OA; thus, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: microcurrent;
osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular
joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly,
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0
articles in PubMed, 8 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 365 in Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources.
Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
INTERFERENTIAL THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of interferential therapy for the
treatment of shoulder joint osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

262

Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of interferential therapy for patients with
OA; thus, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Interferential
Therapy; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint,
acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 0 articles in PubMed, 23 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 1,300 in
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0
from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
INFRARED THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of infrared therapy for the treatment of
shoulder joint osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of infrared therapy for patients with OA;
thus, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Infrared Therapy;
osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

263

joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0
articles in PubMed, 501 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 16,300 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
LASER THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of laser therapy for the treatment of
shoulder joint osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of laser therapy for patients with OA; thus,
there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Laser Therapy;
osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular
joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 3
articles in PubMed, 42 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 13,100 in Google
Scholar, and 5 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 0 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

264

we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
DIATHERMY FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of diathermy, for the treatment of
shoulder joint osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of diathermy for patients with OA; thus,
there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Diathermy;
osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular
joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 1
article in PubMed, 53 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 2,070 in Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources.
Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ULTRASOUND FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of ultrasound for the treatment of
shoulder joint osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

265

Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of ultrasound for patients with OA; thus,
there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Ultrasound,
Ultrasonography; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint,
acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 469 articles in PubMed, 5,154 in Scopus, 2 in CINAHL, 11 in Cochrane Library,
29,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from
PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
TRANSCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL STIMULATION (TENS) FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER
OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of transcutaneous electrical stimulation
(TENS) for the treatment of shoulder joint osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of TENS for patients with OA; thus, there is
no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Electrical Therapy,
Electrical Stimulation Therapy, Transcutaneous Electric Nerve Stimulation; osteoarthritis,
degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint; controlled

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

266

clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic
review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 6 articles in PubMed,
1,841 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane Library, 7,520 in Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources†. We considered for inclusion 2 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL,
0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 2 articles
considered for inclusion, 0 randomized trials and 2 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
H-WAVE® DEVICE STIMULATION FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of H-wave® Device Stimulation for the
treatment of shoulder joint osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of H-wave® Device Stimulation for
patients with OA; thus, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: H-wave
stimulation; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint,
acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 0 articles in PubMed, 2 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 110 in
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0
from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

267

review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PULSED ELECTROMAGNETIC
FREQUENCY FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS
Not Recommended
Pulsed electromagnetic frequency is not recommended for treatment of shoulder
osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies for the treatment of shoulder osteoarthrosis. Pulsed
electromagnetic frequency has been evaluated in quality trials for other MSDs, including LBP
and found to be ineffective and thus is not recommended for treatment of shoulder
osteoarthrosis.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Pulsed
Electromagnetic Frequency, Low Field Magnetic Stimulation; osteoarthritis, degenerative
joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0 articles in PubMed, 874 in
Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 281 in Cochrane Library, 30 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

INJECTION THERAPIES
Intra-articular glucocorticosteroid injections are sometimes performed to attempt to deliver
medication with minimal systemic effects to the shoulder joints, especially the
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

268

glenohumeral joint and sometimes the acromioclavicular joint (1367) (1368). These injections
are both performed with and without fluoroscopic or ultrasound guidance. Their usual
purpose is to gain sufficient relief to either resume conservative medical management or to
delay surgical intervention. There is quality evidence of short-term efficacy in treatment of
hip and knee osteoarthrosis patients (see Knee Disorders), with duration of benefits of
approximately 3 months.
Viscosupplementation has been performed particularly for knee osteoarthrosis and hip
osteoarthrosis (1369-1372). These injections have been performed in the shoulder as well (13731380)
.
Platelet-rich plasma injections have been used to treat shoulder osteoarthrosis (1381) (1382).
Prolotherapy injections have been utilized to treat a wide array of musculoskeletal
disorders, including shoulder osteoarthrosis (1383).
INTRA-ARTICULAR GLUCOCORTICOSTEROID INJECTIONS FOR SHOULDER GLENOHUMERAL
OR ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT OSTEOARTHROSIS
Recommended
Glucocorticosteroid injections are moderately recommended for treatment of
osteoarthrosis of the glenohumeral or AC joint.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Glenohumeral or acromioclavicular joint pain from osteoarthrosis sufficient that control
with NSAIDs, acetaminophen, and potentially exercise is unsatisfactory. There should be
understanding that the anticipated duration of benefit is 3 months based on inference from
many quality trials of hip injections.
Benefits
Short to intermediate-term improved pain.
Harms
Steroid flare after an injection; glucose elevation, rare infection, rare nerve injury.
Theoretical weakening of cuff tendons and potentially delayed surgical healing.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Schedule one injection and monitor the patient over the next 4-6 weeks with follow-up
assessments of pain, function and ADLs. A series of 3 injections should not be a priori
scheduled. There are no quality studies assessing frequency/dose in glenohumeral or AC
joints. Medications used in the RCTs for the comparably-sized hip joint were triamcinolone
hexacetonide 40mg or triamcinolone acetonide 80mg, or methylprednisolone 40 or 80mg.
Anesthetics have most often been bupivacaine or mepivacaine. There are no head to head
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

269

comparisons in quality studies of different medications to ascertain the optimum
medication(s). Multiple doses have been utilized with no head-to-head comparisons in
trials; however, a comparative clinical trial found greater efficacy for methylprednisolone
80mg over 40mg in treatment of hip osteoarthrosis (Robinson et al., 2007).
Indications for discontinuation
A second glucocorticosteroid injection is not recommended if the first has typically resulted
in at least 50% reduction in pain, significant improvement in function (e.g., achieving at least
50% improvement, return to normal function, return to usual work) or resolution of
symptoms. If there has not been a response to a first injection, there is generally less
indication for a second. If the interventionalist believes the medication was not well placed
and/or if the underlying condition is so severe that 1 steroid bolus could not be expected to
adequately treat the condition, a second injection may be indicated and should be
performed under ultrasound or fluoroscopic guidance. In patients who respond with a
pharmacologically appropriate several weeks of temporary, partial relief of pain, but who
then have worsening pain and function and who are not (yet) interested in surgical
intervention, a repeat steroid injection is an option. There are not believed to be benefits
beyond approximately 3 of these injections in a year. Patients requesting a fourth injection
should have reassessment of conservative management measures and be counseled for
possible surgical intervention.
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating intra-articular glucocorticosteroid injections for
treatment of shoulder joint OA. However, there are many quality trials for treatment of
both hip and knee osteoarthrosis patients with documented efficacy lasting approximately 3
months compared with placebo. These injections are invasive, have a low risk of adverse
effects, but are relatively costly. They are an option for treatment of moderate to severe
shoulder osteoarthrosis patients particularly after inadequate results from NSAID trials,
activity modification, exercise, or other conservative interventions.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Intra-articular
Glucocorticosteroid Injections, Intra-articular Corticosteroid Injections; osteoarthritis,
degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic
review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 18 articles in PubMed, 7
in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 10 in Cochrane Library, 2,090 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. † We considered for inclusion 3 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus,0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 2 articles
considered for inclusion, 0 randomized trials and 1 systematic review met the inclusion
criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

270

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
INTRAARTICULAR VISCOSUPPLEMENTATION INJECTIONS FOR SHOULDER
OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against intraarticular shoulder viscosupplementation
injection for treatment of osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are 4 moderate-quality trials that included shoulder osteoarthrosis patients. One
suggested efficacy (Di Giacomo et al., 2017), while the other 3 suggest inefficacy (Blaine et
al., 2008) (Kwon et al., 2000) (Shibata et al., 2001). Some of the higher quality trials for
treatment of knee and hip osteoarthrosis suggest short- to intermediate-term efficacy (see
Knee Disorders Guideline). Viscosupplementation injections are invasive, have a low risk of
adverse effects, but are relatively costly. A high-quality trial showed glucocorticosteroid
injections are superior (Qvistgaard et al., 2006). Viscosupplementation injections do not
have consistent evidence of efficacy for treatment of shoulder osteoarthrosis and are
generally not recommended. As some studies of hip/knee OA suggest efficacy, the overall
rating is “No Recommendation. ” In light of current evidence, viscosupplementation would
be a last-resort consideration in a patient who has not had symptomatic relief of pain or
function with glucocorticoid injections, is not a suitable candidate for surgery, and is
searching for non-operative alternatives. While cost is a factor, shared decision making with
the patient explaining risks and benefits as well as costs associated with the procedure, in
addition to a nuanced discussion with the commercial carrier explaining patient-specific
factors justifying viscosupplementation use would be reasonable.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms:
Viscosupplementation Injections; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder,
glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 8 articles in PubMed, 840 in Scopus, 0 in
CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 1,720 in Google Scholar, and 3 from other sources†. We

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

271

considered for inclusion 2 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 5 from Google Scholar, and 3 from other sources. Of the 10 articles considered for
inclusion, 4 randomized trials and 5 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PLATELET-RICH PLASMA INJECTIONS FOR SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against intraarticular platelet-rich plasma injections for
treatment of shoulder osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials comparing PRP injections with sham or placebo for shoulder OA.
Injections are invasive, have some adverse effects, are high cost and are lacking quality data
against a known standard for efficacy, thus there is no recommendation. In highly select
patients where all evidence-based options aside from arthroplasty have been exhausted, a
PRP injection may be reasonable if it considerably alters the need for arthroplasty.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Platelet-Rich
Plasma Injections, Autologous Conditioned Serum Injections, Autologous Conditioned
Plasma Injections, Orthokine Therapy, Regenokine Therapy; osteoarthritis, degenerative
joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 8 articles in PubMed, 1,651 in
Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 2 in Cochrane Library, 483 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

272

review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PROLOTHERAPY INJECTIONS FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS AND
OTHER SHOULDER DISORDERS
Not Recommended
Prolotherapy injections are not recommended for treatment of osteoarthrosis and other
shoulder disorders.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
There are no quality trials of prolotherapy injection for treatment of shoulder osteoarthrosis
patients. These injections are invasive, have adverse effects, and are moderate to high cost;
thus, in the absence of quality evidence of efficacy, they are not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Prolotherapy
Injections; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint,
acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 2 articles in PubMed, 429 in Scopus, 2 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 1,480 in
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 0
from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources. Of the 1 article considered for inclusion, 0 randomized trials and 1 systematic
review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
ARTHROSCOPY AND CHONDROPLASTY
Arthroscopy is thought to have a role in glenohumeral arthrosis with purposes including
diagnosis, debridement, capsular release, subacromial decompression, planning an
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

273

operative approach, and synovectomy (1384-1396). It is particularly thought to be helpful for
treatment of other conditions, such as SLAP tears and rotator cuff tendinopathies (1386).
Chondroplasty has often been performed for treatment of osteoarthrosis patients and
involves abrading of the cartilage surfaces (see Knee Disorders) (1389,1397-1399) Arthroscopy is
not generally indicated in presence of advanced glenohumeral arthritis.
ARTHROSCOPY FOR EVALUATION AND TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS
Recommended
Arthroscopy is recommended for evaluation and treatment of shoulder osteoarthrosis, but
only when an associated disorder is felt to be present, symptomatic, and treatable.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Shoulder joint pain from osteoarthrosis to the extent that control with NSAID(s),
acetaminophen, and exercise strategies is unsatisfactory. Patients should have a treatable,
significantly symptomatic associated condition (e.g., rotator cuff tendinopathy,
impingement syndrome, SLAP tear), with the expectation that resolution of the associated
condition will improve the patients’ overall condition. Appropriate diagnostic testing of the
associated condition should have been performed (e.g., injection, MRI or MRA) to confirm a
treatable associated condition. Chondroplasty is not considered an indication or an
indicated procedure (See below).
Benefits
Improved pain and function.
Harms
Lack of improvement, reduced function, infection, adhesive capsulitis.
Rationale
There are quality studies including arthroscopy, although not of shoulder osteoarthrosis.
Also, the literature typically utilizes arthroscopy as the gold standard for comparison.
Arthroscopy is performed nearly universally in a context of a pre-operative diagnosis, such
as rotator cuff tendinopathy, that is thought to be a treatable abnormality, rather than
merely for diagnostic purposes (Dinnes et al., 2003) (Fouse et al., 2007) (Abrams, 2006)
(Baker et al., 2003) (Ahmad et al., 2004) (Boszotta et al., 2004). If a specific diagnosis that is
treatable with arthroscopic techniques, such as rotator cuff tendinitis is not suggested by
and supported by the evaluation with history, physical examination, and imaging studies,
then surgical intervention is much less likely to be successful and caution should be taken in
doing a purely diagnostic arthroscopy. Diagnostic arthroscopy is invasive, has adverse
effects and is high cost. Thus, arthroscopy is selectively recommended.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

274

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: shoulder
arthroscopy, arthroscopy; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral
joint, acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 151 articles in PubMed, 8,311 in Scopus, 14 in CINAHL, 11 in
Cochrane Library, 29,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 7 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 2 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 10 articles considered for inclusion, 0
randomized trials and 1 systematic review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
CHONDROPLASTY FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OSTEOARTHROSIS
Not Recommended
Chondroplasty is not recommended for treatment of shoulder osteoarthrosis.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating arthroscopy for patients with OA of the shoulder.
Chondroplasty is invasive, has adverse effects, is costly, and lacks efficacy in the knee as
demonstrated by a high quality, sham-controlled trial (see Knee Disorders Guideline)
(Moseley et al., 2002). Thus, chondroplasty is not recommended for treatment of shoulder
osteoarthrosis.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Chondroplasty;
osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular
joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly;
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

275

articles in PubMed, 199 in Scopus, 1 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 1,180 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 3 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 3 articles considered for inclusion, 0 randomized trials and 1 systematic
review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

DISTAL CLAVICLE RESECTION
Distal clavicle resection has been performed for chronic, significant acromioclavicular joint
pain with either open (1400-1410) or arthroscopic approaches (1367,1402,1404,1406,1407,1411-1417).
DISTAL CLAVICLE RESECTION FOR TREATMENT OF ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT PAIN
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against distal clavicle resection (either arthroscopic or
open) for treatment of acromioclavicular joint pain.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
A presumptive diagnosis of AC joint osteoarthrosis requires both:
●
nonradiating AC joint pain and
●
tenderness aggravated by direct palpation.
A confirmatory diagnosis requires all of the following:
●
degenerative findings on imaging studies and
●
positive cross-arm adduction test and
●
diagnostic challenge test with lidocaine showing short-term resolution of pain.
Surgical considerations for AC joint resection (Mumford procedure) include both of the
following:
●
AC joint symptoms persisting for at least 6-12 months and
●
symptoms insufficiently managed by nonoperative means, including
glucocorticosteroid injections.
Benefits
Reduced pain and improved function.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

276

Harms
Lack of improvement, adhesive capsulitis.
Rationale
There are no quality trials comparing clavicle excision to nonsurgical treatment for AC
arthrosis. Two trials of different approaches of distal clavicle resection suggest comparable
efficacy (Charron et al., 2007, Freedman et al., 2007). Trials have also been performed in
patients with rotator cuff tears with and without distal clavicle resection (Park et al., 2015,
Kim et al., 2011), and suggested some additive benefit in the larger of the two studies (Kim
et al., 2011). Because there is no quality evidence of efficacy and there are adverse effects
of surgery, there is no recommendation. Resection is potentially indicated among those
patients with severe, chronic pain focused on the AC joint and not sufficiently treated by
nonoperative treatments.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Distal Clavicle
Resection; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint,
acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly; systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 6 articles in PubMed, 237 in Scopus, 3 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane Library, 8090 in
Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 1
from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 2 from
other sources. Of the 5 articles considered for inclusion, 4 randomized trials and 1
systematic review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SHOULDER ARTHROPLASTY AND REVERSE SHOULDER ARTHROPLASTY
Shoulder arthroplasty has been used to treat shoulder osteoarthrosis (1389,1395,1418-1460), and
glenohumeral degenerative joint disease (17,170,1386,1418,1422,1461-1480).
Shoulder resurfacing and partial resurfacing procedures have also been performed (1466,14811498)
. A meniscal allograft and other soft tissue interposition, as well as glenoid reaming
without replacement are alternative treatments when the glenoid is arthritic and total
shoulder arthroplasty is contraindicated, i.e., young patients. Overall outcomes of
arthroplasties have generally been good (1499).
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

277

The volume of quality literature is much less for shoulder arthroplasties than for those of
the hip where there are numerous trials with durations of follow-up lasting many years.
Humeral head resurfacing is thought to have advantages for younger and/or more physically
active patients (1482). There is controversy as to whether a humeral hemiarthroplasty or total
arthroplasty should be performed (1482) with concerns about excessive wear of the glenoid if
it is not replaced (1467,1482). It has been suggested the decision should depend on adequacy of
bone, extent of articular damage, and presence of irreparable rotator cuff tears (1482,1493).
TOTAL SHOULDER ARTHROPLASTY FOR SEVERE ARTHROSIS
Recommended
Total shoulder arthroplasty is moderately recommended for highly selective patients with
severe arthrosis.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
A presumptive diagnosis of glenohumeral osteoarthrosis requires all of the following:
●
nonradiating shoulder glenohumeral joint pain,
●
functional impairment, and
●
reduced range of motion (ROM) compared with the contralateral side (if unaffected).
May include crepitus on ROM.
A confirmatory diagnosis of glenohumeral osteoarthrosis requires:
●
Imaging findings consistent with significant degenerative joint disease.
Nonoperative treatments include the following:
●
nonopioid analgesics, and
●
range-of-motion and/or strengthening exercises.
Surgical considerations for hemiarthroplasty or total shoulder arthroplasty include all of the
following:
●
symptoms of glenohumeral osteoarthrosis for at least 6 months,
●
sufficient symptoms and functional limitations, such as impairments of activities of
daily living and/or occupational tasks,
●
significant glenohumeral degenerative joint disease on imaging and
●
unresponsive or insufficiently responsive to both of the above nonoperative
treatments for a period of 6 months (Lo et al., 2005) (Gartsman et al., 2005).
Postoperative rehabilitation is required. Yet, there are no quality trials and a systematic
review concluded “Published rehabilitation strategies following TSA and RTSA [have] little
consistency among protocols. There is a need to determine optimal rehabilitation
approaches post TSA and RTSA based on clinical outcomes” (Bullock et al., 2019).
Benefits
Potential for improved function.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

278

Harms
Potential for worse function, adhesive capsulitis, severe impairment, worsened pain.
Rationale
There are no quality trials comparing arthroplasty with a quality rehabilitative protocol.
There are multiple moderate quality trials comparing total vs. hemiarthroplasty (Gartsman
et al., 2000) (Sandow et al., 2013) (Lo et al., 2005); different surgical approaches (Lapner P,
2020) (Kwon YW, 2019); cemented vs. uncemented and/or other components (Litchfield et
al., 2011) (Romeo et al., 2020) (Wiater et al., 2020) (Boileau et al., 2002); and comparisons
of various components (Lo et al., 2005). However, all 3 RCTs suggest total shoulder
arthroplasty is superior or trends toward superiority over hemiarthroplasty (Gartsman et al.,
2000) (Sandow et al., 2013) (Lo et al., 2005). These trials document major improvements
compared with pre-operative measures of pain and function among these patients
(Gartsman et al., 2000) (Lo et al., 2005). There are relatively few quality trials comparing
different operative approaches and sparse data address long-term outcomes. Shoulder
arthroplasty is invasive, has adverse effects, and is costly. These procedures are
recommended for select patients who failed multiple attempts at controlling symptoms
short of arthroplasty.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Shoulder
Arthroplasty, Shoulder Joint Replacement; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease,
shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled
trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation,
random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 619 articles in PubMed, 631 in
Scopus, 32 in CINAHL, 40 in Cochrane Library, 49,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 31 from PubMed, 3 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 11 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 45 articles
considered for inclusion, 11 randomized trials and 7 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
HEMIARTHROPLASTY FOR SEVERE ARTHROSIS
Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

279

Hemiarthroplasty is moderately recommended for highly selective patients with severe
arthrosis.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
A presumptive diagnosis of glenohumeral osteoarthrosis requires all of the following:
●
nonradiating shoulder glenohumeral joint pain,
●
functional impairment, and
●
reduced range of motion (ROM) compared with the contralateral side (if unaffected).
May include crepitus on ROM.
A confirmatory diagnosis of glenohumeral osteoarthrosis requires:
●
Imaging findings consistent with significant degenerative joint disease.
Nonoperative treatments include the following:
●
nonopioid analgesics, and
●
range of motion and/or strengthening exercises.
Surgical considerations for hemiarthroplasty or total shoulder arthroplasty include all of the
following:
●
symptoms of glenohumeral osteoarthrosis for at least 6 months,
●
sufficient symptoms and functional limitations, such as impairments of activities of
daily living and/or occupational tasks,
●
significant glenohumeral degenerative joint disease on imaging and
●
unresponsive or insufficiently responsive to both of the above nonoperative
treatments for a period of 6 months (Lo et al., 2005) (Gartsman et al., 2005).
Benefits
Potential for improved function.
Harms
Potential for worse function, adhesive capsulitis, severe impairment, worsened pain.
Rationale
There are no quality trials comparing arthroplasty with a quality rehabilitative protocol.
There are multiple moderate quality trials comparing total vs. hemiarthroplasty (Gartsman
et al., 2000) (Sandow et al., 2013) (Lo et al., 2005); different surgical approaches (Lapner P,
2020) (Kwon YW, 2019); cemented vs. uncemented and/or other components (Litchfield et
al., 2011) (Romeo et al., 2020) (Wiater et al., 2020) (Boileau et al., 2002); and comparisons
of various components (Lo et al., 2005). However, all 3 RCTs suggest total shoulder
arthroplasty is superior or trends toward superiority over hemiarthroplasty (Gartsman et al.,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

280

2000) (Sandow et al., 2013) (Lo et al., 2005). These trials document major improvements
compared with pre-operative measures of pain and function among these patients
(Gartsman et al., 2000) (Lo et al., 2005). There are relatively few quality trials comparing
different operative approaches and sparse data address long-term outcomes. Shoulder
arthroplasty is invasive, has adverse effects, and is costly. These procedures are
recommended for select patients who failed multiple attempts at controlling symptoms
short of arthroplasty.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Shoulder
Arthroplasty, Shoulder Joint Replacement; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease,
shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled
trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation,
random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 619 articles in PubMed, 631 in
Scopus, 32 in CINAHL, 40 in Cochrane Library, 49,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 31 from PubMed, 3 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 11 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 45 articles
considered for inclusion, 11 randomized trials and 7 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
REVERSE SHOULDER ARTHROPLASTY FOR SEVERE ARTHROSIS
Recommended
Reverse shoulder arthroplasty is moderately recommended for highly selective patients with
moderate to severe arthrosis.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
A presumptive diagnosis of glenohumeral osteoarthrosis requires all of the following:
●
nonradiating shoulder glenohumeral joint pain,
●
functional impairment, and
●
reduced range of motion (ROM) compared with the contralateral side (if unaffected).
May include crepitus on ROM.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

281

A confirmatory diagnosis of glenohumeral osteoarthrosis requires:
●
Imaging findings consistent with significant degenerative joint disease.
Nonoperative treatments include the following:
●
nonopioid analgesics, and
●
range of motion and/or strengthening exercises.
Surgical considerations for hemiarthroplasty or total shoulder arthroplasty include all of the
following:
●
symptoms of glenohumeral osteoarthrosis for at least 6 months,
●
sufficient symptoms and functional limitations, such as impairments of activities of
daily living and/or occupational tasks,
●
significant glenohumeral degenerative joint disease on imaging and
●
unresponsive or insufficiently responsive to both of the above nonoperative
treatments for a period of 6 months (Lo et al., 2005) (Gartsman et al., 2005).
Benefits
Potential for improved function.
Harms
Potential for worse function, adhesive capsulitis, severe impairment, worsened pain.
Rationale
There are no quality trials comparing arthroplasty with a quality rehabilitative protocol.
There are multiple moderate quality trials comparing total vs. hemiarthroplasty (Gartsman
et al., 2000) (Sandow et al., 2013) (Lo et al., 2005); different surgical approaches (Gartsman
et al., 2000) (Sandow et al., 2013) (Lo et al., 2005); cemented vs. uncemented and/or other
components (Litchfield et al., 2011) (Romeo et al., 2020) (Wiater et al., 2020) (Boileau et al.,
2002); and comparisons of various components (Lo et al., 2005). However, all 3 RCTs suggest
total shoulder arthroplasty is superior or trends toward superiority over hemiarthroplasty
(Gartsman et al., 2000) (Sandow et al., 2013) (Lo et al., 2005). These trials document major
improvements compared with pre-operative measures of pain and function among these
patients (Gartsman et al., 2000) (Lo et al., 2005). There are relatively few quality trials
comparing different operative approaches and sparse data address long-term outcomes.
Shoulder arthroplasty is invasive, has adverse effects, and is costly. These procedures are
recommended for select patients who failed multiple attempts at controlling symptoms
short of arthroplasty.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Shoulder
Arthroplasty, Shoulder Joint Replacement; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

282

shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled
trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation,
random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 619 articles in PubMed, 631 in
Scopus, 32 in CINAHL, 40 in Cochrane Library, 49,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 31 from PubMed, 3 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 11 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 45 articles
considered for inclusion, 11 randomized trials and 7 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
HUMERAL RESURFACING FOR SEVERE ARTHROSIS
Recommended
Humeral resurfacing (similar to humeral head replacement) is recommended as an option.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Severe arthrosis with symptoms of at least 6 to 12 months that are insufficiently managed
with non-operative measures (Lo et al., 2005) (Gartsman et al., 2005) and/or
glucocorticosteroid injection(s). Patients with diffuse degenerative joint disease whether
OA, rheumatoid arthritis, or other cause, are generally good candidates for total joint
arthroplasties (Lo et al., 2005) (Gartsman et al., 2005), although some may be candidates for
hemiarthroplasties (Smith et al., 1998). Hemiarthroplasties have been generally
recommended for patients with massive rotator cuff tears combined with degenerative joint
disease (Smith et al., 1998). However, shoulder arthroplasty is not nearly as successful, on
average, as hip or knee arthroplasty.
Post-operative rehabilitation is required. Yet, there are no quality trials and a systematic
review concluded “Published rehabilitation strategies following TSA and RTSA…(have) little
consistency among protocols. There is a need to determine optimal rehabilitation
approaches post TSA and RTSA based on clinical outcomes” (Bullock et al., 2019).
Benefits
Potential for improved function.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

283

Harms
Potential for worse function, adhesive capsulitis, severe impairment, worsened pain.
Rationale
There are no quality trials comparing arthroplasty with a quality rehabilitative protocol.
There are multiple moderate quality trials comparing total vs. hemiarthroplasty (Gartsman
et al., 2000) (Sandow et al., 2013) (Lo et al., 2005); different surgical approaches (Gartsman
et al., 2000) (Sandow et al., 2013) (Lo et al., 2005); cemented vs. uncemented and/or other
components (Litchfield et al., 2011) (Romeo et al., 2020) (Wiater et al., 2020) (Boileau et al.,
2002); and comparisons of various components (Lo et al., 2005). However, all 3 RCTs suggest
total shoulder arthroplasty is superior or trends toward superiority over hemiarthroplasty
(Gartsman et al., 2000) (Sandow et al., 2013) (Lo et al., 2005). These trials document major
improvements compared with pre-operative measures of pain and function among these
patients (Gartsman et al., 2000) (Lo et al., 2005). There are relatively few quality trials
comparing different operative approaches and sparse data address long-term outcomes.
Shoulder arthroplasty is invasive, has adverse effects, and is costly. These procedures are
recommended for select patients who failed multiple attempts at controlling symptoms
short of arthroplasty.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Shoulder
Arthroplasty, Shoulder Joint Replacement; osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease,
shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint; controlled clinical trial, controlled
trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation,
random*, randomized, randomization, randomly; systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 619 articles in PubMed, 631 in
Scopus, 32 in CINAHL, 40 in Cochrane Library, 49,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 31 from PubMed, 3 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 11 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 45 articles
considered for inclusion, 11 randomized trials and 7 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

FOLLOW-UP VISITS
Patients with osteoarthrosis generally require a few follow-up appointments for purposes of
monitoring symptoms, advancing treatment, and gradually reducing limitations especially if

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

284

treatment of a co-existent condition substantially resolves the symptoms. Patients with
more advanced disease may require a greater number of appointments to attempt other
treatments as well as to teach about adaptive techniques and use of adaptive equipment (as
indicated) to facilitate continued participation in daily activities despite limitations of the
shoulder. Frequencies of appointments may also be greater if workplace limitations are
required, and job demands are higher or may require job modifications or adaptive
equipment. Post-operative rehabilitation can be considerable, particularly in older patients
with other associated injuries such as rotator cuff injuries. In those cases, there may be a
requirement for therapy on a prolonged basis to recover as much function as possible.

OSTEONECROSIS (AVASCULAR NECROSIS)
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The following section contains recommendations for evaluating and managing Shoulder
Osteonecrosis from the Evidence-Based Shoulder Disorders Panel. These recommendations
are based on critically appraised higher-quality research evidence or, when such evidence
was unavailable or inconsistent, on expert consensus as required in ACOEM’s Methodology.
Recommendations are made under the following categories:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Strongly Recommended, “A” Level
Moderately Recommended, “B” Level
Recommended, “C” Level
Insufficient – Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – No Recommendation (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – Not Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Not Recommended, “C” Level
Moderately Not Recommended, “B” Level
Strongly Not Recommended, “A” Level

OVERVIEW
Osteonecrosis of the humerus is considerably less common than osteonecrosis of the
femoral head (1500). Osteonecrosis, or avascular necrosis, is a complex pathological process
involving increased bone marrow pressure and ischemia with loss of vascular supply to the
bone which may progress to bone death initiated by vascular occlusion (1500-1504). Although it
may occur in any bone, it tends to occur in bones that have a more tenuous blood supply,
including the heads of the femur, humerus, and other ends of long bones (1505,1506). If the
process advances, the bone collapses (1507).
Most epidemiological literature for osteonecrosis is derived from hip osteonecrosis, with no
quality studies of the shoulder. The greatest risk for osteonecrosis is believed to be
glucocorticosteroid use (1500,1508-1518) or endogenous excess glucocorticoids (1517). Other risk
factors include diabetes mellitus, arteriovascular disease (1501,1511,1519), hyperlipidemia, sickle
cell anemia (1514), coagulopathies (1517), Gaucher’s disease (1501,1511,1513,1514), HIV (1516,1520), postirradiation (1501,1511,1514), alcoholism (1501,1511,1514,1516,1517,1519,1521,1522), and smoking . Yet, many
cases are idiopathic (1501,1523). Genetic factors are also believed to be important (1500).
Osteonecrosis appears to have a clinically silent, pre-clinical state (most frequently
identified in the asymptomatic hip) (1501,1524) that when found first in the shoulder is often
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

285

present elsewhere, such as in the hips or knees (1500,1515,1525). Patients present with either
acute or insidious onset of persistent shoulder pain that may be worse with overhead use
(1501)
. Pain is often worse at night and may be somewhat worse with activity. Reduced
shoulder range of motion may occur and will nearly always be present if there is bony
collapse. Pain and range of motion worsen as the degree of impairment progresses (1500,1501).
The disease may be progressive – in the hip there appears to be potential for recovery at
any of the early stages (1501); thus, the same is thought to be true for osteonecrosis of other
bones including that of the humerus (1500).

WORK LIMITATIONS
Divers and other workers in compressed air atmospheres who experience impaired blood
supply to the humerus due to nitrogen gas in the blood during excessively rapid
decompression may develop osteonecrosis, and thus be considered to have an occupational
disorder due to dysbarism (atmospheric compression, decompression). Major trauma is
another reported cause (1500,1501,1518,1526). Thus, if a humeral fracture is occupational, a
subsequent case of osteonecrosis arising out of that humeral fracture may be considered
occupational. Whether or not stereotypical forceful use of the joint is a risk is speculative.
Among those developing osteonecrosis, reducing or eliminating activities that significantly
provoke symptoms and the disease process (including avoidance of dysbaric exposures) is
recommended. There is no quality evidence regarding reducing forceful use, although
limitations are sometimes instituted for months; therefore, there is no recommendation for
or against reducing forceful use.

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
LABORATORY STUDIES
A general medical evaluation is usually needed as part of the evaluation of a patient with
osteonecrosis. This evaluation should be tailored based on the patient’s history, although a
general profile is usually needed to at minimum include several laboratory studies to
evaluate potential causal and/or contributory factors. These studies include complete blood
count with differential; general chemistries; hepatic enzymes (including AST, ALT, GGTP);
lipid profile; coagulation studies; and hemoglobin A1c. Measurement of glucocorticoids may
be needed, although there are usually clues based on other history, physical examination
and/or laboratory studies.
In the absence of quality evidence, it is recommended that the diagnosis of shoulder
osteonecrosis be managed according to the recommendations for Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathy. See the following recommendations:
●
Antibodies to Confirm Specific Disorders for Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy
[Recommended, Evidence (C)]
●
Non-specific Inflammatory Markers for Screening for Inflammatory Disorders in
Subacute or Chronic Shoulder Pain [Recommended, Evidence (C)]
●
Cytokine Testing for Chronic Shoulder Pain, including Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies
[Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]

X-RAYS
Roentgenograms (x-rays) have been used in the diagnosis of osteonecrosis (1527,1529).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

286

X-RAYS FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN AND OSTEONECROSIS
Recommended
X-rays are recommended for evaluation of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain,
including evaluating osteonecrosis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
All patients suspected of having osteonecrosis.
Benefits
Diagnosis of osteonecrosis, fracture, calcific tendinitis, or otherwise latent medical
condition(s).
Harms
Medicalization or worsening of otherwise benign shoulder condition; minor radiation
exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining x-rays once is generally sufficient with two to three views. If the patient is thought
to have osteonecrosis, but the x-rays are negative, there are other tests to consider such as
MRI. For patients with chronic shoulder pain, it may be reasonable to obtain a second set of
x-rays later to re-evaluate the patient’s condition, particularly if symptoms change.
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating the use of x-rays for osteonecrosis. One moderate
quality study found bone scan and bone pressure measurements to be more diagnostic than
routine radiographs (Zizic et al., 1986). However, X-rays are helpful for initial evaluation of
most patients with shoulder pain, including osteonecrosis. Plain radiographic findings are
used to stage disease involvement in osteonecrosis or humeral avascular necrosis. Early xrays are usually normal or have less distinct trabecular patterns (Harreld et al., 2009) (Ficat,
1985). As the disease progresses, x-rays begin to show osteoporotic areas, progressing to
sclerotic areas and finally flattening and bony collapse (Harreld et al., 2009) (Ficat, 1985). Xrays also assist both to diagnose and with the differential diagnostic possibilities such as
calcific tendinitis and arthroses. X-rays are non-invasive, low to moderately costly, and have
little risk of adverse effects and therefore, are recommended.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

287

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Radiography, XRays, Roentgenograms; Osteonecrosis, Osteonecrotic Symptoms, Avascular Necrosis,
Aseptic Necrosis, Ischemic Bone Necrosis, shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity,
specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests,
efficacy, and efficiency. We found and reviewed 372 articles in PubMed using Most Recent
tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 373
articles, 206 in Scopus, 4 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 4900 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 3 from other sources. Of the 3
articles considered for inclusion, 2 diagnostic studies and 0 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

BONE SCANS
Bone scans have been used for the diagnosis of osteonecrosis of the shoulder (352).
BONE SCANNING FOR ACUTE, SUBACUTE, OR CHRONIC PAIN
Sometimes Recommended
Bone scanning, often with SPECT, is recommended for select use in patients with acute,
subacute, or chronic pain to assist in the diagnosis of osteonecrosis and other conditions
with increased polyostotic bone metabolism, particularly when more than one joint needs
to be evaluated.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Patients with suspicion of osteonecrosis, or other increased bone metabolism, generally
having already had MRI, but with concerns for other problems such as other joint
involvement.
Benefits
Some radiation exposure.
Harms

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

288

Negligible. Some radiation exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally, one evaluation.
Rationale
Bone scanning with SPECT is helpful to identify areas of increased bone metabolism
(Siddiqui et al., 1993); thus, its primary use is for osteonecrosis cases (typically identified on
radiographs) for which there are concerns for other joint involvement. One study suggested
bone scanning superior to MRI (Sakai et al., 2001). One moderate quality study found bone
scan and bone pressure measurements to be more diagnostic than routine radiographs
(Zizic et al., 1986). Bone scanning is minimally invasive, has no adverse effects aside from
radiation exposure, but is costly. It is selectively recommended for evaluation of patients
with concerns of wider involvement. The threshold for use should generally be low, as wider
involvement of osteonecrosis may further emphasize a need for risk factor modification and
imaging monitoring of other joints.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Bone Scans, Bone
Scintigraphy; Osteonecrosis, Osteonecrotic Symptoms, Avascular Necrosis, Aseptic Necrosis,
Ischemic Bone Necrosis, shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive
predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and efficiency.
We found and reviewed 28 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a
secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 28 articles, 16 in
Scopus, 1 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane Library, 3,020 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 1 article
considered for inclusion, 1 diagnostic study and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (CT)
CT FOR EVALUATING PATIENTS WITH OSTEONECROSIS
Sometimes Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

289

CT is selectively recommended for evaluating patients with osteonecrosis, including for
patients who need advanced imaging, but have contraindications for MRI or where helical
CT is unavailable.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Shoulder pain from osteonecrosis with suspicion of subchondral fracture(s) or increased
polyostotic bone metabolism, particularly if there is contraindication for MRI and there is no
helical CT available if CT is preferred.
Benefits
Identification of extent and severity of osteonecrosis.
Harms
Negligible. Minor radiation exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining serial CT scans to track healing or progression status is reasonable. Generally, one
evaluation. A second may be needed if there is a significant clinical change or to evaluate
progress/resolution.
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating CT scans. While CT is considered superior to MRI for
imaging of most shoulder abnormalities where advanced imaging of calcified structures is
required, for osteonecrosis, there is no clear preference of CT over MRI. However, helical CT
is generally thought to be preferable to CT for identification of fracturing and thus use of
‘plain’ CT is limited, including those settings without helical CT.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Computerized
Tomography, CT; Osteonecrosis, Osteonecrotic symptoms, Avascular Necrosis, Aseptic
Necrosis, Ischemic Bone Necrosis, shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity,
positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and
efficiency. We found and reviewed 62 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did
a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 62 articles, 3 in
Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 11 in Cochrane Library, 2,810 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

290

from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

HELICAL CT
HELICAL CT FOR EVALUATING OSTEONECROSIS
Sometimes Recommended
Helical CT is recommended for evaluating patients with osteonecrosis who have
contraindications for MRI.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Helical CT scans are sometimes used for diagnosing osteonecrosis, especially with concerns
about fracturing and collapse. Also indicated for those needing evaluation of osteonecrosis
but with contraindications for MRI.
Benefits
Diagnosis of osteonecrosis, subchondral fractures; tracking progression or healing of
osteonecrosis.
Harms
Negligible. Minor radiation exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally one evaluation. A second may be needed if there is a significant clinical change or
for evaluating progress/resolution.
Rationale
Helical CT is considered superior to MRI for imaging of most shoulder abnormalities where
advanced imaging of calcified structures is required. For osteonecrosis, there is no clear
preference of CT over MRI. Helical CT is thought to be better than CT at identifying
fracturing and is therefore recommended for select use.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

291

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Tomography,
Spiral Computed, Helical CT scans, Spiral CT scans, Helical Computed Axial Tomography;
Osteonecrosis, Osteonecrotic Symptoms, Avascular Necrosis, Aseptic Necrosis, Ischemic
Bone Necrosis, shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and efficiency. We found
and reviewed 0 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 0 articles, 0 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in
Cochrane Library, 200 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

LOCAL ANESTHETIC INJECTIONS
In the absence of quality evidence, it is recommended that the diagnosis of shoulder
osteonecrosis be managed according to the recommendations for rotator cuff
tendinopathy.
See Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy Injections.

FUNCTIONAL CAPACITY EVALUATIONS
In the absence of quality evidence, it is recommended that the diagnosis of shoulder
osteonecrosis be managed according to the recommendations for Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathy. See Functional Capacity Evaluations for Chronic Disabling Shoulder Pain
[Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)].

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (MRI)
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been used to detect early osteonecrosis of the
shoulder because MRI may detect subtle lesions in the bone (1530).
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (MRI) FOR DIAGNOSING OSTEONECROSIS
Recommended
Magnetic resonance imaging is recommended for diagnosing osteonecrosis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

292

Indications
Patients with subacute or chronic shoulder pain thought to be related to osteonecrosis
(AVN), particularly in whom the diagnosis is unclear or in whom additional diagnostic
evaluation and staging is needed.
Benefits
Secure a diagnosis, grade severity, assess collapse potential, and stage.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
One MRI is performed for diagnosis and a baseline. A second study at last several weeks
later may be used to assess progression and regression, plan surgery and re-stage.
Rationale
Multiple studies show utility of MRI for assessing ON (Blanchard et al., 1999). Helical
computerized tomography is considered superior to MRI for imaging bone collapse (Stevens
et al., 2003). However, MRI is considered superior for imaging bone marrow edema, which
is inversely correlated with prognosis of osteonecrosis. Thus, both tests have their
advantages. MRI is not invasive (or minimally so with a contrast exam), has negligible
adverse effects, is high cost, has utility for the diagnosis and staging of osteonecrosis and is
thus recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Magnetic
Resonance Imaging, MRI Scans; Osteonecrosis, Osteonecrotic Symptoms, Avascular
Necrosis, Aseptic Necrosis, Ischemic Bone Necrosis, shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic,
sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value
of tests, efficacy, and efficiency. We found and reviewed 102 articles in PubMed using Most
Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and
review 102 articles, 458 in Scopus, 4 in CINAHL, 954 in Cochrane Library, 3180 in Google
Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 0 from
Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other
sources. Of the 3 articles considered for inclusion, 1 diagnostic study and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

293

reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ULTRASOUND
ULTRASOUND FOR DIAGNOSING OSTEONECROSIS
No Recommendation
Ultrasound is neither recommended nor not recommended for use on patients suspected of
having osteonecrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies of ultrasound for diagnosing osteonecrosis, and thus there is no
recommendation. However, there are other indications for ultrasound.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Ultrasound,
Ultrasonography; Osteonecrosis, Osteonecrotic Symptoms, Avascular Necrosis, Aseptic
Necrosis, Ischemic Bone Necrosis, shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity,
positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and
efficiency. We found and reviewed 447 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we
did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 447 articles, 141
in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 16,947 in Cochrane Library, 2,480 in Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL,
0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET)
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET) FOR DIAGNOSING OSTEONECROSIS
Not Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

294

PET scanning is not recommended for the evaluation of patients with osteonecrosis.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that PET is helpful in improving
care of osteonecrosis. Additional studies are needed to determine if PET adds something to
the diagnosis, treatment and outcomes beyond that obtained by a careful history, physical
examination, plain x-rays, clinical impression and advanced imaging before it can be
recommended for evaluating osteonecrosis.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Positron Emission
Tomography, PET; Osteonecrosis, Osteonecrotic Symptoms, Avascular Necrosis, Aseptic
Necrosis, Ischemic Bone Necrosis, shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity,
positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and
efficiency. We found and reviewed 1article in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a
secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 1 article, 22 in Scopus,
0in CINAHL, 918 in Cochrane Library, 530 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 0from Google Scholar, and 0from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
ACTIVITY MODIFICATION AND EXERCISE
In the absence of quality evidence for exercise and physical therapy, it is recommended that
the treatment of shoulder osteonecrosis be managed according to the following
recommendations for Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy and Shoulder Pain:
●
Exercise Prescriptions for Shoulder Pain [Recommended, Evidence (C)]
●
Aerobic Exercises for Treatment of Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies [Recommended,
Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Range-of-Motion Exercise for Treatment of Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies
[Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

295

●
Strengthening Exercises for Treatment of Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies
[Recommended, Evidence (C)]
●
Physical and/or Occupational Therapy for Treatment of Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies
[Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
AVOIDANCE OF DYSBARIC EXPOSURES FOR THE TREATMENT OF OSTEONECROSIS
Recommended
Reduction or elimination of activities that are significant risks for osteonecrosis including the
avoidance of dysbaric exposure is recommended.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
All patients with osteonecrosis.
Benefits
Potential to modify the disease course and prevent need for surgery.
Harms
Adverse effects of treatments rendered.
Rationale
There are few quality studies evaluating efficacy of risk factor modification for
osteonecrosis. As the following are known modifiable risk factors, elimination of
decompression exposures, control of diabetes mellitus, elimination of or reductions in
glucocorticosteroid use, and elimination of alcohol and tobacco products are all
recommended at the time the diagnosis is considered. As there is some evidence statins
may reduce risk (Pritchett, 2001), and tobacco is also a risk, the composite data suggest
aggressive targeting of all coronary artery disease risk factors is needed and recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Decompression
Sickness, Avoidance of Barotrauma, Avoidance of Dysbaric Exposure, Risk Factors;
Osteonecrosis, Osteonecrotic Symptoms, Avascular Necrosis, Aseptic Necrosis, Ischemic
Bone Necrosis, shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 22 articles in PubMed, 158 in Scopus, 20 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 1350 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

296

from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
AVOIDANCE OF SYMPTOM-PROVOKING ACTIVITIES OR OTHER RISK FACTORS FOR THE
TREATMENT OF OSTEONECROSIS
Recommended
Reduction or elimination of activities that are significant risks for osteonecrosis, including
control of diabetes mellitus, elimination or reductions in glucocorticosteroid use, and
elimination of alcohol and tobacco is recommended.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
All patients with osteonecrosis.
Benefits
Potential to modify the disease course and prevent need for surgery
Harms
Adverse effects of treatments rendered.
Rationale
There are few quality studies evaluating efficacy of risk factor modification for
osteonecrosis. As the following are known modifiable risk factors, elimination of
decompression exposures, control of diabetes mellitus, elimination of or reductions in
glucocorticosteroid use, and elimination of alcohol and tobacco products are all
recommended at the time the diagnosis is considered. As there is some evidence statins
may reduce risk (Pritchett, 2001), and tobacco is also a risk, the composite data suggest
aggressive targeting of all coronary artery disease risk factors is needed and recommended.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

297

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Decompression
Sickness, Avoidance of Barotrauma, Avoidance of Dysbaric Exposure, Risk Factors;
Osteonecrosis, Osteonecrotic Symptoms, Avascular Necrosis, Aseptic Necrosis, Ischemic
Bone Necrosis, shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 22 articles in PubMed, 158 in Scopus, 20 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 1350 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
AGGRESSIVE TARGETING OF CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE RISK FACTORS FOR TREATMENT
OF OSTEONECROSIS
Recommended
Aggressive targeting of coronary artery disease risk factors is recommended for the
treatment of shoulder osteonecrosis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
All patients with osteonecrosis.
Benefits
Potential to modify the disease course and prevent need for surgery.
Harms
Adverse effects of treatments rendered.
Rationale
There are no quality trials of aggressive treatments of cardiovascular disease risk factors.
Yet, epidemiological evidence supports risks for osteonecrosis associated with diabetes
mellitus, alcohol and smoking. Some evidence in limited patients (e.g., renal) also suggest

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

298

statins are associated with lower risk (Pritchett, 2001) (Ajmal et al., 2009). Anatomical
evidence appears to support a disease mechanism based on tenuous blood supply. Thus,
there is a rationale for targeting cardiovascular disease risk factors in patients with
osteonecrosis. Although there is no quality evidence of efficacy of cardiovascular disease
risk factor modification, it has a strong theoretical construct, is not invasive, has generally
low adverse effects, and is only moderately costly depending on the interventions(s). Thus,
it is recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Aggressive
Targeting for Coronary Artery Disease Risk Factors; Osteonecrosis, Osteonecrotic Symptoms,
Avascular Necrosis, Aseptic Necrosis, Ischemic Bone Necrosis, shoulder; controlled clinical
trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0 articles in PubMed, 15 in
Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 745 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MEDICATIONS
There is no quality literature specific to shoulder osteonecrosis for nearly all of the following
interventions. In the absence of quality evidence, it is recommended that the diagnosis of
shoulder osteonecrosis be managed according to the recommendations for Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathy and Shoulder Pain:
●
NSAIDs for Treatment of Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies and Shoulder Pain [Strongly
Recommended, Evidence (A)]
●
Acetaminophen for Acute, Subacute, Chronic, or Post-operative Shoulder Pain
[Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibiting Anti-depressants for Subacute or Chronic
Shoulder Girdle Pain [Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors for Acute, Subacute, or Chronic Shoulder
Pain and Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Anti-convulsants for Acute, Subacute or Chronic Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathies [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Capsicum Creams for Acute, Subacute, Chronic Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathy [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

299

●
Topical NSAIDs, including Diclofenac Epolamine for Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathy [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Topical Glyceryl Trinitrate, Lidocaine Patches, Eutectic Mixture of Local Anesthetics
(EMLA), and Other Creams/Ointments for Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy
[Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
See also the ACOEM Opioids guideline for the treatment of subacute and chronic pain.
BISPHOSPHONATES TO TREAT OSTEONECROSIS
No Recommendation
Bisphosphonates are neither recommended nor not recommended to treat osteonecrosis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no trials on the use of bisphosphonates for shoulder osteonecrosis.
Bisphosphonates have been evaluated in multiple moderate quality studies of osteonecrosis
in the hip and the results conflict with some showing efficacy with delayed collapse (Lai et
al., 2005) (Venesmaa et al., 2001) and some showing lacking efficacy (Chen et al., 2015)
(Wang et al., 2008) (Wilkinson et al., 2001). Bisphosphonates are not invasive, have some
adverse effects and are moderately costly, but there is substantially conflicting data on
efficacy. Thus, there is no recommendation for treatment of the shoulder from inference
regarding studies of the hip.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Bisphosphonates,
Diphosphonates; Osteonecrosis, Osteonecrotic Symptoms, Avascular Necrosis, Aseptic
Necrosis, Ischemic Bone Necrosis, shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0 articles in PubMed, 19 in Scopus, 0 in
CINAHL, 4 in Cochrane Library, 1430 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

300

ORAL GLUCOCORTICOIDS FOR TREATMENT OF OSTEONECROSIS
Not Recommended
Oral glucocorticoids are not recommended for treatment of osteonecrosis.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
There are no quality studies assessing treatment of osteonecrosis with glucocorticosteroids.
However, there is strong evidence that glucocorticosteroids are significant risk factors for
the condition, thus, by inference, and in the absence of evidence of efficacy,
glucocorticosteroids are not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Glucocorticoids;
Osteonecrosis, Osteonecrotic Symptoms, Avascular Necrosis, Aseptic Necrosis, Ischemic
Bone Necrosis, shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 10 articles in PubMed, 44 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 2 in Cochrane
Library, 3,250 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
GLUCOCORTICOID INJECTIONS FOR TREATMENT OF OSTEONECROSIS
Not Recommended
Glucocorticoid injections are not recommended for treatment of osteonecrosis.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

301

There are no quality studies assessing treatment of osteonecrosis with glucocorticosteroids.
However, there is strong evidence that glucocorticosteroids are significant risk factors for
the condition, thus, by inference, and in the absence of evidence of efficacy,
glucocorticosteroids are not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Glucocorticoids;
Osteonecrosis, Osteonecrotic Symptoms, Avascular Necrosis, Aseptic Necrosis, Ischemic
Bone Necrosis, shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 10 articles in PubMed, 44 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 2 in Cochrane
Library, 3,250 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ALLIED HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
HYPERBARIC OXYGEN FOR OSTEONECROSIS
Recommended
Hyperbaric oxygen is recommended for the treatment of shoulder osteonecrosis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
All patients with osteonecrosis, although especially appears useful for Osteonecrosis Ficat
Stage 2. It may be reasonable to attempt HBO in patients with more severe osteonecrosis.
Benefits
Potential to modify the disease course and prevent need for surgery.
Harms
Barotrauma (especially of the ears), oxygen toxicity, claustrophobia/anxiety.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

302

Frequency/Dose/Duration
By inference from the hip: 2. 5 ATA of hyperbaric oxygen for 82 minutes, comprising a
period of 60 minutes when the patient was continuously exposed to 2. 5 ATA without
interruption, for a total of 30 treatments (Kim et al., 2004).
Indications for discontinuation
Completion of course, intolerance, clinical resolution, osteonecrosis collapse.
Rationale
There are no quality trials for treatment of shoulder ON with hyperbaric oxygen. However,
by analogy with hip ON which is believed to have the identical pathophysiological
mechanism and intervention (HBO), there is one moderate quality study suggesting durable,
reduced need of arthroplasty lasting 7 years among HBO-treated patients (Camporesi et al.,
2010), although the sample size is modest. Hyperbaric oxygen has been used to treat
osteonecrosis of the jaw (Shimura et al., 2006), but a study following osteonecrosis of the
hips of children from chemotherapeutics found no improvements with hyperbaric oxygen.
Despite its high cost, HBO is not invasive, has low adverse events, and has some evidence of
efficacy for osteonecrosis of the hip with a durable reduced need of surgery. Thus, it is
recommended for treatment of shoulder osteonecrosis.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Hyperbaric
Oxygen Therapy, HBOT, Hyperbaric Oxygenation; Osteonecrosis, Osteonecrotic Symptoms,
Avascular Necrosis, Aseptic Necrosis, Ischemic Bone Necrosis; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0 articles in PubMed, 15 in
Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 2 in Cochrane Library, 437 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

303

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
There are multiple surgical procedures that have been used for treatment of osteonecrosis,
including core decompression similar to that for the hip (1500,1524,1531-1539), arthroscopy with
or without core decompression (1535,1540,1541), vascularized and devascularized bone grafting
(418,1539,1542-1545)
, humeral head resurfacing (1490,1498,1546-1552), and arthroplasties (1490,1498,15461550)
. Electrical stimulation is also used on the hip, although there are no quality studies of
the procedure (1553).
Core decompression with or without bone grafts is the surgical procedure that has been
utilized most frequently to treat osteonecrosis of either the hip or humerus (1500,1501,1537,15541560)
. The primary purpose of the procedure is to relieve the elevated intramedullary
pressure that stagnates microvascular circulation (1500,1501).
Hemi- and total shoulder arthroplasty have been used for the treatment of osteonecrosis of
the shoulder (1500,1546,1548,1561-1571).
CORE DECOMPRESSION SURGERY TO TREAT OSTEONECROSIS
Recommended
Core decompression surgery is recommended to treat osteonecrosis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Patients with generally moderate to severe osteonecrosis either (i) not responding to risk
factor modification and/or (ii) felt to be at risk of collapse and further delay while treating
risk factors or treating with hyperbaric oxygen is felt to be too risky.
Benefits
Potential to heal without arthroplasty.
Harms
Superficial and deep infection(s), osteomyelitis, failure to prevent collapse and need for
arthroplasty.
Rationale
There are no quality studies of the efficacy of core decompression of the humerus, as the
sole quality study included coring in all patients and then compared with/out stem cell
injections (Hernigou et al., 2021). Core decompression with or without bone grafts has been
widely utilized to treat hip osteonecrosis (Ficat, 1985) (Castro et al., 2000) (Steinberg et al.,
2001) (Warner et al., 1987) (Rijnen et al., 2003) (Stulberg et al., 1991), and thus by
inference, the humerus. However, the two moderate-quality studies of hips in adults (Koo et
al., 1995) (Stulberg et al., 1991) conflict (Castro et al., 2000). The primary purpose of the
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

304

procedure is to relieve the elevated intramedullary pressure that stagnates the
microvascular circulation (Castro et al., 2000). In a case series, results were good in 94% of
Stage I and 82% in Stage II. However, a case series cannot prove that earlier treatment
results in superior outcomes as results may mislead through spectrum and other biases.
While the coring decompression is not without risks and is costly, and although the two
quality studies of a coring procedure in the hip conflict, core decompression is selectively
recommended based on an apparent trend for the procedure to prevent collapse.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Core
Decompression, Core Decompression Surgery; Osteonecrosis, Osteonecrotic Symptoms,
Avascular Necrosis, Aseptic Necrosis, Ischemic Bone Necrosis, shoulder; controlled clinical
trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 12 articles in PubMed, 25 in
Scopus, 5 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 1370 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 2 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 3 articles
considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ARTHROPLASTY FOR SHOULDER OSTEONECROSIS
Recommended
Arthroplasty is recommended for treatment of osteonecrosis with collapse or severe disease
unresponsive to non-operative treatment.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Patients with collapse of the humeral head are immediate candidates for arthroplasty.
Additional candidates include those with severe osteonecrosis who are:
●
unresponsive to risk factor modification, and/or
●
felt to be at significant risk of immediate collapse.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

305

Benefits
Potential for curative treatment.
Harms
Superficial and deep infection(s), osteomyelitis, risk of requiring explanation. If young
individual, increased risk of requiring revision surgery.
Rationale
There are no quality studies of shoulder arthroplasty for ON of the humerus. By analogy,
once the head of the femur collapses, the treatment is usually arthroplasty, although early
case series reported high revision rates of up to 37% that have more recently declined to
approximately 2 to 9% (Salvati et al., 1988) (Chandler et al., 1981) (Saito et al., 1989) (Kantor
et al., 1996) (Piston et al., 1994) (Chiu et al., 1997) (Garino et al., 1997) (Stulberg et al.,
1997) (Fye et al., 1998) (Kim et al., 2003) (Taylor et al., 2001) (Xenakis et al., 2001) with
improvements initially attributed to cementation techniques with subsequent reductions in
revisions attributed to cementless techniques (Babis GC, 2004). A few of the quality studies
regarding arthroplasty were performed for osteonecrosis, although none solely included
those patients (Kim et al., 2003) (Brodner et al., 2003) (Kim et al., 2002). See Hip
Osteoarthrosis section on arthroplasty for additional details. The prognosis appears to be
reasonably good in more recent studies of these patients and thus, arthroplasty is
selectively recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Arthroplasty;
Osteonecrosis, Osteonecrotic Symptoms, Avascular Necrosis, Aseptic Necrosis, Ischemic
Bone Necrosis, shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 100 articles in PubMed, 264 in Scopus, 25 in CINAHL, 12in Cochrane
Library, 5,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 12
from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL,0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 14 articles considered for inclusion, 0 randomized
trials and 13 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

306

ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The following section contains recommendations for evaluating and managing adhesive
capsulitis from the Evidence-Based Shoulder Disorders Panel. These recommendations are
based on critically appraised higher-quality research evidence or, when such evidence was
unavailable or inconsistent, on expert consensus as required in ACOEM’s Methodology.
Recommendations are made under the following categories:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Strongly Recommended, “A” Level
Moderately Recommended, “B” Level
Recommended, “C” Level
Insufficient – Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – No Recommendation (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – Not Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Not Recommended, “C” Level
Moderately Not Recommended, “B” Level
Strongly Not Recommended, “A” Level

OVERVIEW
Adhesive capsulitis is also known as frozen shoulder, painful stiff shoulder, periarthrosis, or
periarthritis (4,1572-1575). However, the disorder continues to be poorly understood and no
commonly used term adequately describes the condition as the shoulder is neither frozen,
nor are there consistent presence of adhesions and inflammation (1576,1577), nor is it
necessarily painful. Reported findings include histological evidence of chronic inflammation,
perivascular infiltration, fibrosis of the subsynovial layer, and sometimes there is associated
subacromial bursitis (1576-1578). For lack of a better term, “adhesive capsulitis” will be used in
this guideline.
The lifetime cumulative incidence of adhesive capsulitis has been estimated at 2 to 5%
(1576,1579)
. Most cases begin gradually, although some occur quickly after discrete events such
as trauma (1580-1582). Idiopathic adhesive capsulitis most commonly affects females between
age 45 and 65 (80% of cases). There is a 15-20% chance of having bilateral (not concurrent)
adhesive capsulitis. Three clinical phases are commonly recognized – inflammatory (pain),
stiff (pain and limited motion), and thawing (resolution). The majority of patients resolve
with resolution of pain and recovery of close to normal motion (1583). It has been described
as a self-limited disease lasting up to 2 to 3 years (193,1576,1580,1582-1595), with 10 to 20% of
patients having long-term debility (1581,1582,1589,1595-1597); others have described it as a chronic
disorder associated with prolonged disability (95,1582,1589,1598-1602).
Adhesive capsulitis may be spontaneous and idiopathic, primary (1576,1582,1590,1596,1597,1600,1603),
as well as caused by, or secondary to injuries (1582), prolonged immobilization, rotator cuff
tendinopathies (1604-1606), surgery, and predisposing medical conditions (193,1589,1597,1603). Any
factor that results in reduced range of motion is thought to be a risk for adhesive capsulitis.
There is no quality evidence that work activities are a direct cause (1607), yet workplace
injuries may secondarily result in adhesive capsulitis.
Diseases associated with adhesive capsulitis include diabetes mellitus (1572,1587,1608-1616),
including a ‘dose-response’ relationship with severity of diabetes (1617), crystal arthropathies,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

307

rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis (1618), other rheumatological diseases (1619),
paresis and hemiplegia (1620), hypothyroidism (1572,1608,1613,1621), and thyrotoxicosis (1572).
Immunological abnormalities have also been reported (1622). However, the most commonly
used classification systems for adhesive capsulitis have generally excluded arthroses and
crystal arthropathies (47). While studies of risk and prognostic factors are notably quite weak,
poor clinical prognostic factors include diabetes (1577,1623-1625), prior episodes of shoulder
pain, duration of more than 1 month at presentation, passive elevation less than 101ºF,
concomitant neck pain, severe daytime pain, and psychosocial stress (1626,1627). The quality of
the overall evidence base for treatment of adhesive capsulitis is relatively weak
(105,755,841,1628-1630)
.

DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
Various criteria have been used. Thus, there are no consensus diagnostic criteria (1579,1631).
Criteria used include gradual onset of global limitation of passive range of motion and
normal radiographs other than osteopenia, which might or might not be present.
The diagnosis of adhesive capsulitis is primarily clinical and based on the history and
physical examination (1631,1632). Additional tests are often performed largely to exclude other
treatable conditions. X-rays are recommended and may be needed of both shoulders,
particularly if there was a bilateral injury or need for comparison with the unaffected
shoulder. Other studies may be helpful, including MRI, especially for evaluation of potential
rotator cuff tendinopathies or tears.

WORK LIMITATIONS
Patients with adhesive capsulitis should be encouraged to incrementally perform more work
activities to the extent possible, as these activities are generally therapeutic as long as they
do not increase shoulder functional loss/ disability. However, some limitations are often
needed, especially for more physically demanding work activities. Such limitations are
gradually reduced as recovery progresses and may include limitations in heavy lifting and
overhead activities. If surgery is performed, there is a similar need for workplace limitations
that are gradually reduced. In contrast with numerous other disorders, frequent
appointments and therapy to advance exercises, incrementally increase range of motion,
work through fear avoidant beliefs, and advance work activities are often needed for
patients with adhesive capsulitis.

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
ANTIBODIES
ANTIBODIES TO CONFIRM SPECIFIC DISORDERS
Sometimes Recommended
Antibody levels are selectively recommended to evaluate and diagnose patients with
shoulder pain that have reasonable suspicion of rheumatological disorders including
inflammatory arthropathies.
Antibody levels are strongly recommended as a screen to confirm specific rheumatological
disorders when there are indications (e.g., symptoms and/or signs suggestive of rheumatoid
arthritis), but are generally not indicated for most patients with other specific soft tissue
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

308

musculoskeletal disorders, such as rotator cuff tendinopathies due to high false positive
rates in that non-specific diagnostic setting. Consultation with a rheumatologist may be
helpful when there is a known or suspected disorder.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Shoulder pain and a presumptive diagnosis of an inflammatory rheumatological disorder.
May include pain that fails to respond as would be expected, with or without findings in
other joints. Findings in other joints increases the probability that testing will be positive.
Testing is generally not indicated for most patients with rotator cuff tendinopathies. Testing
is also not generally indicated at initial symptoms presentation unless symptoms have been
present for at least a few weeks and/or are severe; otherwise, e.g., negative test results are
more likely as insufficient time is likely to have passed and may mislead.
Benefits
Secure an accurate diagnosis, which should then focus the treatment plan to more
efficacious treatments.
Harms
Potential for false-positive tests; however that is generally minimal unless the pre-test
probability is low.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally only ordered one time. However, if the testing was performed early and there is
further disease persistence or progression, a second test is reasonable as more time may be
required for the antibody tests to become positive.
Rationale
Elevated antibody levels are highly useful for confirming clinical impressions of
inflammatory rheumatological diseases. However, routine use of these tests in shoulder
pain patients is not recommended, especially as wide-ranging, non-focused test batteries
are likely to result in inaccurate diagnoses due to false positives and low pre-test
probabilities. Clinicians should also be aware that false-negative results occur.
Measurement of antibody levels is minimally invasive, unlikely to have substantial adverse
effects, and is low to moderately costly depending on the specific test ordered. They are
recommended for focused testing of a limited number of diagnostic considerations.
However, ordering of a large, diverse array of antibody levels without targeting a few
specific disorders diagnostically is not recommended.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

309

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Antibodies;
rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder
impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis;
diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive
value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 9 articles in
PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match
tab to find and review 9 articles, 676 in Scopus, 2 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 119 in
Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0
from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from
other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

NONSPECIFIC INFLAMMATORY MARKERS
NON-SPECIFIC INFLAMMATORY MARKERS FOR SCREENING FOR INFLAMMATORY
DISORDERS IN SUBACUTE OR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN
Sometimes Recommended
Serum measures of erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, creatine kinase
muscle, aldolase, hyaluronic acid, and other inflammatory markers are selectively
recommended for screening either inflammatory disorders with reasonable suspicion of
inflammatory disorder in patients with subacute or chronic shoulder pain or osteoarthrosis.
They are generally not indicated for patients with non-specific disorders, such as rotator cuff
tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Shoulder pain and a presumption of an inflammatory process. Pain that fails to respond as
would be expected, with or without findings in other joints. Findings in other joints
increases the probability that testing will be positive. Testing is generally not indicated for
most patients with rotator cuff tendinopathies. Testing is also not generally indicated at
initial symptoms presentation unless symptoms have been present for at least a few weeks
and/or are severe; otherwise, e.g., negative test results are more likely as insufficient time is
likely to have passed and may mislead.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

310

Benefits
Identify whether an inflammatory process is likely, which may help focus on the need for
further testing to secure an accurate diagnosis.
Harms
Potential for false-positive tests; however, that is generally minimal unless the pre-test
probability is low.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally only ordered one time. However, if the testing was performed early, and there is
further disease persistence or progression, a second test is reasonable as the inflammatory
mediators may have needed additional time to become positive.
Rationale
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is the most commonly used systemic marker for nonspecific inflammation. It is elevated in numerous inflammatory conditions including
rheumatological disorders as well as infectious diseases. C-reactive protein (CRP) is a marker
of systemic inflammation that has been associated with an increased risk of coronary artery
disease. It is also a non-specific marker for other inflammation. Both ESR and CRP are also
markers of infection. Numerous inflammatory markers have been found to be elevated in
patients with musculoskeletal disorders but because it is not known whether these factors
precede or are a consequence of the disease processes, their utility in patient management
is unclear. Other non-specific markers of inflammation include elevated ferritin and an
elevated protein-albumin gap, neither of which have known clinical roles. Serological studies
for non-specific inflammatory markers are minimally invasive, have low risk of adverse
effects, and are low cost. They are recommended as a reasonable screen for systemic
inflammatory conditions especially if the patient also has other pain without clear definition
of a diagnosis or those with fibromyalgia or myofascial pain syndrome, although specificity is
not high. However, ordering of a large, diverse array of anti-inflammatory markers without
targeting a few specific disorders diagnostically is not recommended.
A large study found elevated biomarkers (C-reactive protein, creatine kinase muscle,
aldolase) are associated with osteoarthrosis compared with normal controls (Ganguly,
2019). Another study found elevated serum hyaluronic acid levels among both those with
either rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthrosis, although the HA levels were higher among
those with rheumatoid arthritis (Goldberg RL, 1991) and TNF alpha, IL-1B, IL-10 and IL-17
(Hussein et al., 2008). However, clear distinctions between these measures among those
with osteoarthrosis and inflammatory arthropathies is not apparent in the available
literature. Thus, the utility of these tests may be as potential screening for arthropathies
irrespective of inflammatory arthroses.
A high-quality, 7-year study of 880 elderly subjects evaluated impacts of IL-6 and CRP on
both cross-sectional associations with morbidity and long-term mortality (Taaffe DR, 2000).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

311

CRP and IL-6 were higher among smokers at baseline and those with higher body mass
indexes (BMIs). IL-6 and CRP were also higher among those with hypertension, myocardial
infarction, stroke, glycosylated hemoglobin levels, HDL, and number of chronic conditions.
Both IL-6 and CRP were inversely related to quartiles of moderate and strenuous physical
activity. CRP and/or IL-6 were associated with incidence of hypertension, myocardial
infarction, diabetes, and incident cases of chronic conditions. Physical performance
measures of changes in grip strength, signature time, chair-rise and 6-m fast walk all were
not significant for IL-6 or CRP.
Serological studies for non-specific inflammatory markers are minimally invasive, have low
risk of adverse effects, and are low cost. They are recommended as a screen for systemic
inflammatory and osteoarthrosis conditions especially if the patient also has other pain
without clear definition of a diagnosis, although specificity is not high and these measures
tend to be elevated in both osteoarthrosis and inflammatory disorders, with higher levels
among those with inflammatory disorders. However, ordering of a large, diverse array of
anti-inflammatory markers without targeting a few specific disorders diagnostically is not
recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: blood
sedimentation, c reactive protein, procalcitonin, nonspecific inflammatory markers;
osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular
joint; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative
predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 6
articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using
Best Match tab to find and review 6 articles, 756 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 11,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. We considered for inclusion 0
from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 6 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 8 articles considered for inclusion, 5 diagnostic
studies and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria. †
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Cytokines;
osteoarthritis, degenerative joint disease, shoulder, glenohumeral joint, acromioclavicular
joint; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative
predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 12
articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using
Best Match tab to find and review 12 articles, 1030 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane
Library, 12,000 in Google Scholar, and 0from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria. †
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: C-Reactive
Protein, Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate, Non-Specific Inflammatory Markers; rotator cuff

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

312

tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement
syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; diagnosis,
diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value,
predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and reviewed 35 articles in PubMed
using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to
find and review 37 articles, 61 in Scopus, 10 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane Library, 171 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

CYTOKINES
CYTOKINE TESTING FOR CHRONIC SHOULDER PAIN, INCLUDING ROTATOR CUFF
TENDINOPATHIES
Not Recommended
Routine testing with or the use of batteries of cytokine tests is not recommended to
diagnose chronic shoulder pain, including rotator cuff tendinopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Cytokines purportedly determine whether a patient is experiencing pain or has suffered a
toxicological insult. However, there are no quality studies that address this premise.
Available studies suggest that these markers may be elevated in chronic pain conditions, but
these studies did not have adequate control groups and did not control for potential
confounders. The range of disorders in which cytokines may be elevated also needs
definition, as the current range of conditions appears large (Taaffe DR, 2000, Martelletti,
1999, Perini, 2005, Covelli, 1991, Gratt, 2005, Alexander, 1998, Chen, 2004, Gur, 2002,
Madson, 1994), suggesting they are not specifically isolated to patients with chronic pain,
and thus the specificity of these tests seems likely to be quite low.
A high-quality, 7-year study of 880 elderly subjects evaluated impacts of IL-6 and CRP on
both cross-sectional associations with morbidity and long-term mortality (Taaffe DR, 2000).
CRP and IL-6 were higher among smokers at baseline and those with higher body mass
indexes (BMIs). IL-6 and CRP were also higher among those with hypertension, myocardial
infarction, stroke, glycosylated hemoglobin levels, HDL, and number of chronic conditions.
Both IL-6 and CRP were inversely related to quartiles of moderate and strenuous physical
activity. CRP and/or IL-6 were associated with incidence of hypertension, myocardial
infarction, diabetes, and incident cases of chronic conditions. Physical performance
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

313

measures of changes in grip strength, signature time, chair-rise and 6-m fast walk all were
not significant for IL-6 or CRP. Cytokines need to be rigorously studied to ascertain if there is
a place for them in the evaluation and/or management of chronic pain conditions, including
stratification for occupationally-relevant diseases.
Documentation that the discovery of elevated cytokine levels results in changes in
evaluation and/or clinical management is also necessary. Alternatively, this testing may be
useful if the absence of elevated cytokine levels would warrant concluding that a patient
does not have a remediable physical cause of shoulder pain. While cytokine testing is
minimally invasive, and has a low risk of adverse effects, these tests are high cost, with no
evidence that they alter the clinical management of patients with chronic shoulder pain.
Their place in the evaluation of patients with chronic shoulder pain is yet to be determined
and cytokine testing is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Cytokines,
Interleukins, Chemokines and lymphokines; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear,
shoulder pain, rotator cuff injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis,
subacromial bursitis, supraspinatus tendinitis; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity,
positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy,
efficiency. We found and reviewed 56 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did
a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 76 articles, 545 in
Scopus, 12 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 218 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 5 from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 1
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 8 articles
considered for inclusion, 0 diagnostic studies and 2 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

X-RAYS
X-RAYS FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
X-rays are recommended for evaluation of adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

314

Indications
All patients suspected with adhesive capsulitis.
Benefits
Diagnosis of calcific tendinitis, arthritides, fracture or otherwise latent medical condition(s).
Harms
Negligible; minor radiation exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining x-rays once is generally sufficient with two to three views. For patients with
chronic adhesive capsulitis and/or shoulder pain, it may be reasonable to obtain another set
of x-rays later to re-evaluate the patient’s condition, particularly if symptoms change.
Rationale
There are no quality studies that help define the utility of x-rays, as the only comparative
study had sample sizes that were too small to define the utility of x-rays (Simmonds, 1949).
However, x-rays are clinically helpful to evaluate adhesive capsulitis, particularly to assist in
differential diagnostic possibilities such as arthritides, tendinosis, and calcific tendinitis,
which result in different treatment approaches. X-rays are non-invasive, are of low to
moderate cost, may alter the treatment course, and have little risk of adverse effects. X-rays
are therefore recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Roentgenograms,
X-Rays, Radiography, Roentgenograph; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; diagnosis,
diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value,
predictive value of tests, efficacy, and efficiency. We found and reviewed 1046 articles in
PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match
tab to find and review 1046 articles, 95 in Scopus, 12 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 6860
in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 2 from PubMed,
0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources. Of the 2 articles considered for inclusion, 1 diagnostic study and 1 systematic
review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

315

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

BONE SCANNING
Bone scanning is not indicated for simple adhesive capsulitis, but there are other
indications. See Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy.

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Computerized tomography remains an important imaging procedure, particularly for bony
anatomy, whereas MRI is superior for soft tissue abnormalities. However, most patients
have issues with soft tissue rather than bony abnormalities in the shoulder, thus on a
population-basis, far fewer CT scans are ordered. CT may nevertheless be useful for
shoulder joint abnormalities where advanced imaging of the bones is required (i.e., complex
proximal humerus fracture, scapular fracture). CT also may be useful to evaluate the
anatomy in patients with contraindications for MRI (most typically an implanted metallicferrous device). CT arthrogram is often preferred when evaluating posterior or anterior
glenohumeral instability when the bony anatomy needs to be better defined – such as,
glenoid deficiency and humeral Hill-Sachs lesion – as MRI is not as good for bone imaging.
CT arthrogram can be used in place of MRI to evaluate for rotator cuff tear. Computed
tomography (CT) has been used to diagnose adhesive capsulitis (1415,1633-1635).
CT FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Computerized tomography is selectively recommended for the evaluation of adhesive
capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Imaging for adhesive capsulitis which particularly includes concerns about osseous
abnormalities or other calcified structures. For most cases of adhesive capsulitis, x-rays and
potentially MRI suffice. CT may be indicated when MRI is contraindicated.
Benefits
Diagnosis and understanding of the degree of osseous structures, complex fractures, calcific
tendinitis.
Harms
Radiation exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

316

Obtaining a CT once is generally sufficient. For patients with ongoing adhesive capsulitis and
chronic shoulder pain, it may be reasonable to obtain a second CT later to re-evaluate the
patient’s condition, particularly if symptoms change.
Rationale
One controlled study suggested adhesive capsulitis is associated with a decreased axillary
recess width with lateral thickening and medial joint capsule thickening at the axillary recess
(Cerny et al., 2017). X-rays and MRI are sufficient for most adhesive capsulitis patient
evaluations. CT is superior where imaging calcified structures is required, such as for calcific
tendinitis. CT arthrogram can be selectively used in place of MRI to evaluate for rotator cuff
tear. MRI is considered superior to computerized tomography for imaging most shoulder
abnormalities where advanced imaging of soft tissues is usually the primary concern. A
contrast CT study is minimally invasive, has few, if any, adverse effects but is costly. It is
recommended for select use.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Computer
Tomography (CT); adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity,
specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests,
efficacy, and efficiency. We found and reviewed 326 articles in PubMed using Most Recent
tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 326
articles, 221 in Scopus, 10 in CINAHL, 70 in Cochrane Library, 4170 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 3 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 0 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 6
articles considered for inclusion, 1 diagnostic study and 1 systematic review met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

DIAGNOSTIC ANESTHETIC INJECTIONS
Diagnostic injections particularly of the subacromial space, glenohumeral joint and
acromioclavicular joint are sometimes performed. However, particularly for adhesive
capsulitis, they are nearly always performed in combination with a glucocorticosteroid
injection (see Injection Therapies). Injection with a therapeutic agent is nearly always
preferable due to less overall invasiveness with 1 injection rather than 2, as well as the
potential to assess the patient both immediately post-injection for diagnostic purposes as
well as longer term for therapeutic purposes.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

317

ELECTROMYOGRAPHY
See the Cervical and Thoracic Spine Disorders and Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders
guidelines for discussions regarding use of electrodiagnostic studies for evaluation of
cervical spine and distal upper extremity-related disorders that may present as shoulder
pain. Electrodiagnostic studies have also been used to confirm diagnostic impressions of
other peripheral nerve entrapments, brachial plexopathies, and neurologic component of
thoracic outlet syndrome.

FUNCTIONAL CAPACITY EVALUATIONS
FUNCTIONAL CAPACITY EVALUATIONS FOR CHRONIC DISABLING SHOULDER PAIN
Recommended
Functional capacity evaluations (FCEs) are recommended as an option for evaluation of
disabling chronic shoulder pain where the information may be helpful to attempt to
objectify worker capability, function, motivation, and effort vis-à-vis either a specific job or
general job requirements. There are circumstances where a patient is not progressing as
anticipated at 6 to 8 weeks and an FCE may help evaluate functional status and patient
performance in order to match performance to specific job demands, particularly in
instances where those demands are medium to heavy. If a clinician is comfortable
describing work ability without an FCE, there is no requirement to do this testing.
Recordings or observation for signs of mismatch between effort and self-reported abilities
may be particularly helpful.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Patients with moderate to severe chronic shoulder pain that has ongoing functional
impairments and need to attempt to identify and quantify limitations. There are
circumstances where a patient is not progressing as anticipated at 6 to 8 weeks and an FCE
can evaluate functional status and patient performance in order to match performance to
specific job demands, particularly in instances where those demands are medium to heavy.
More typically, FCEs are useful after a healing plateau is established whether surgery was
performed or not. If a clinician is comfortable describing work ability without an FCE, there
is no requirement to do this testing. Recordings or observation for signs of mismatch
between effort and self-reported abilities may be particularly helpful.
Benefits
Identification and enumeration of limitations. Assess functional abilities and may facilitate
greater confidence in return to work.
Harms

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

318

Inappropriately low estimates of abilities, self-limitation of efforts, excessive disability,
inappropriately precluding the performance of tasks and activities the person could safely
perform. Medicalization, worsening of shoulder pain with testing; may have misleading
results that understate capabilities.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally, only one test is needed. A repeat FCE may be needed if there are substantial
changes in the person’s condition or status, or if there is a need to assess projected
performance against a different set of job criteria.
Rationale
There are no quality studies of FCEs to evaluate ability to perform work and/or work
limitations. Yet, FCEs are one of the few means to attempt to objectify limitations and are
frequently used in workers’ compensation systems, particularly as the correlation between
clinical pain ratings and functional abilities appears weak (Brouwer et al., 2005, Gross et al.,
2003, Reneman et al., 2002, Reneman et al., 2007, Schiphorst Preuper et al., 2008, Smeets
et al., 2007, Eriksen et al., 2006). However, obtaining objective data regarding shoulder
problems is somewhat more challenging than for distal upper extremity-related
impairments due to the degree of reliance on the patient’s subjective willingness to exert or
sustain major activities that are critical for job performance. Because their reliability and
validity have not been proven, FCEs should be utilized to evaluate work ability about what a
patient was willing to do on a given day. They should be carefully performed and
interpreted, but FCEs should not be used to override the judgment about the work ability of
a patient with a shoulder problem.
Many commercial FCE models are available. There is research regarding inter-and intra-rater
reliability for some of the models (complete discussion is beyond the scope of this
guideline). The validity of FCEs, particularly predictive validity, is more difficult to determine,
since factors other than physical performance may affect return to work (Pransky et al.,
2004, Gouttebarge et al., 2004). An FCE may be done for one or more reasons, including
identifying an individual’s ability to perform specific job tasks associated with a job (jobspecific FCE) and physical activities associated with any job (general FCE), or to assist in the
objectification of the degree(s) of impairment(s). The type of FCE needed, and any other
issues the FCE evaluator needs to address, should be specified when requesting an FCE.
The term “capacity” used in FCE may be misleading, since an FCE generally measures an
individual’s voluntary performance rather than his or her capacity. Physical performance is
affected by psychosocial as well as physical factors. The extent of an individual’s
performance should be evaluated as part of the FCE process through analysis of his or her
level of physical effort (based on physiological and biomechanical changes during activity)
and consistency of performance. Perhaps more importantly, the objective findings identified
in the musculoskeletal evaluation should correlate with any identified functional deficits.
The individual’s performance level, especially as it relates to stated levels of performance,
should be discussed in the FCE report. A properly performed and well-reported FCE will
highlight such discrepancies. This is particularly important in shoulder evaluations where

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

319

there may be greater degrees of impairments at stake and where there are somewhat fewer
metrics available than for the distal upper extremity.
FCE test components may vary depending on the model used, but most contain the
following:
●
Patient interview including: informed consent, injury/illness and medical history,
current symptoms, activities and stated limitations, pain ratings/disability questionnaires
●
Musculoskeletal examination (e.g., including analogues of Waddell’s non-organic
signs for the shoulder such as non-anatomic pain)
●
Observations throughout the session (e.g., demonstrated sitting tolerance, pain
modifying behaviors)
●
Material handling tests (lifting, carrying, pushing, pulling)
●
Movement tests (walking, crouching, kneeling, reaching, etc.)
●
Positional tolerance tests
●
Dexterity/hand function
●
Static strength (varies among models)
●
Aerobic fitness (usually submaximal test-also variable among models)
●
Job-specific activities as relevant
●
Reliability of client reporting (e.g., non-organic signs, pain questionnaires, placebo
tests, etc.)
●
Physical effort testing (e.g., Jamar Dynamometer maximum voluntary effort, bell
curve analysis, rapid exchange grip, competitive test performance, heart rate, observation
of clinical inconsistencies, etc.)
FCE test length may vary between FCE models, although most 1-day FCEs are completed in 3
to 4 hours. Two-day tests, where the patient is seen on 2 consecutive days, may be
recommended when there are problems with fatigue (e.g., chronic fatigue syndrome),
delayed onset of symptoms, unusually complex job demands to simulate, and questions
about symptom validity. Test length for 2-day tests is generally 3 to 4 hours on the first day,
and 2 to 3 hours on the second day.
Interpretation of FCE results is complicated in that it is a measure of voluntary performance.
Before beginning testing, the patient is counseled to avoid doing anything to knowingly
reinjure him or herself. Thus, “fear avoidance” may cause testing to seriously underestimate
actual ability and result in a report that the patient had “self-limited performance due to
pain,” suggesting a low pain tolerance, when in reality the patient was doing what he or she
was instructed.
By analogy, the best studies on the ability of FCEs to predict safe re-entry to the workplace
following rehabilitation of work-related back pain/injury suggest that FCEs are not able to
predict safe return to work (concurrent validity) (Gross et al., 2005, Gross et al., 2004, Gross
et al., 2004). In a prospective cohort study of 1,438 consecutive work-related back patients,
all underwent an FCE prior to return to work. In the control group, the FCE was used to
write return-to-work guidelines, while in the study group it was ignored and the worker was
returned usually to full duty. Ignoring the FCE improved outcome (Hall et al., 1994).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

320

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Functional
Capacity Evaluations; rotator cuff tendinopathy, rotator cuff tear, shoulder pain, rotator cuff
injuries, shoulder impingement syndrome, calcific tendinitis, subacromial bursitis,
supraspinatus tendinitis; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, efficiency. We found and
reviewed 6 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 34 articles, 42 in Scopus, 8,289 in CINAHL,
11 in Cochrane Library, 334 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered
for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0
from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is often used as a secondary test after x-ray for many
shoulder joint problems since it is helpful for imaging soft tissues, particularly the rotator
cuff (175,656-666). MRI has been commonly used to assist in the diagnosis and differential
diagnosis of adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder (1636-1658).
MRI FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Sometimes Recommended
MRI is selectively recommended for patients with adhesive capsulitis who are also
suspected of having rotator cuff tears or other soft tissue abnormalities potentially
contributing to the adhesive capsulitis or relevant for the differential diagnosis.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Patients with adhesive capsulitis who are also thought to have a rotator cuff tear or other
soft tissue abnormalities potentially contributing to the adhesive capsulitis. Generally, 4-6
weeks of non-operative treatment is indicated prior to MRA; however, if there is significant
rotator cuff weakness, immediate imaging may be indicated. MRI may be indicated as well
for concerns about thoracic injury. Exceptions include elderly patients, those who would not
undergo surgical repair, or those who have substantial signs of pre-existing large/massive
rotator cuff tear.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

321

Benefits
Secure a secondary diagnosis.
Harms
False positives and false negatives for rotator cuff tears.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
There are many quality studies of MRI for evaluation of adhesive capsulitis. There are
multiple abnormalities that have been strongly associated with adhesive capsulitis,
including:
●
axillary-recess capsule signal enhancement (T1-weighted);
●
capsular thickness;
●
hyperintense signals (T2-weighted fat-suppressed imaging),
●
distention of the bursa in the superior subscapularis recess;
●
enhancement of the coracohumeral ligament signal;
●
coracohumeral ligament shortening;
●
inferior glenohumeral ligament hyperintensity; and
●
coracohumeral ligament at the rotator cuff interval with complete obliteration of the
fat triangle below the coracoid process (Ahn K-S, 2015) (Carbone et al., 2014) (Chi et al.,
2017) (Jung et al., 2019) (Li et al., 2011) (Park et al., 2019) (Teixeira et al., 2012) (Zhao et al.,
2012) (Pessis et al., 2020).
MRI is also helpful for evaluation of rotator cuff tendinopathies (See Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathy). However, there are no studies demonstrating that MRI alters the clinical
course of adhesive capsulitis in most patients. There are concerns that MRI is inferior to MR
arthrography for evaluating the labrum (Schmerl et al., 2005), thus MRA is selectively
recommended for that purpose. MRI is not invasive, has potential adverse effects from
issues of claustrophobia or complications of medication, but is costly. MRI is recommended
for select evaluation of adhesive capsulitis cases, particularly involving concerns regarding
secondary soft tissue pathology and otherwise treatable, causal disorders.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI); adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic,
sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value
of tests, efficacy, and efficiency. We found and reviewed 848 articles in PubMed using Most

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

322

Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and
review 848 articles, 800 in Scopus, 28 in CINAHL, 5 in Cochrane Library, 14100 in Google
Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 14 from PubMed, 1 from
Scopus, 8 from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other
sources. Of the 25 articles considered for inclusion, 12 diagnostic studies and 1 systematic
review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE ARTHROGRAM
Magnetic resonance (MR) arthrography combines MRI with an arthrogram to overcome MRI
limitations and is usually performed in preference to CT arthrography unless bony structure
definition is needed as well (705,706). MR arthrography is particularly thought to be effective
for imaging labral pathology (148,385,707-712). Magnetic Resonance Arthrography has been used
to diagnose adhesive capsulitis (1646,1659-1673).
MR ARTHROGRAM FOR DIAGNOSING ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
MR arthrography is selectively recommended for diagnosing labral tears in patients with
adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Use of MRA in patients with adhesive capsulitis is quite limited. Patients with adhesive
capsulitis who also have symptoms of, or strong clinical suspicion of clinically meaningful
labral tears. Patients should generally have failed non-operative treatment of the labral tear
or soft tissue including NSAID and waiting 4 to 6 weeks without trending towards resolution.
Benefits
Secure a surgical diagnosis.
Harms
False positives and false negatives for labral tears. Arthrography improves the accuracy
especially regarding complete rotator cuff tears and significant labral tears. Small risk of
infection and complications from the injection.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

323

Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
MR arthrograms have been evaluated in several quality studies among patients with
adhesive capsulitis, and while MRI findings were highly diagnostic for adhesive capsulitis
(link to MRI section), MRA was of no or limited additive value in multiple studies (Pessis et
al., 2020) (Manton GL, 2001) (Jung et al., 2006) (Mengiardi et al., 2004). Another study
found decreased glenohumeral distance, capsule thickening and decreased axillary recess
capacity (Lee et al., 2017) and another found decreased joint capacity (Ogul H, 2019) as
associated with adhesive capsulitis. MR arthrography is invasive, has adverse effects
including a low, but definite risk of infection and is painful. It is also costly, although MRA
has been felt to provide better cost effectiveness than MRI or CT arthrography for select
diagnoses (Oh et al., 1999). For patients with adhesive capsulitis, it is likely limited to
patients thought to have a clinically meaningful labral tear or patients with good strength in
order to assess the labrum and rotator cuff with traumatic injury simultaneously and thus, is
recommended for highly selective use. For the vast majority of adhesive capsulitis patients,
MRA is not believed to be of additive value to MRI.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Magnetic
Resonance Arthrogram, adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic,
sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value
of tests, efficacy, and efficiency. We found and reviewed 81 articles in PubMed using Most
Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and
review 81 articles, 33 in Scopus, 1 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane Library, 1950 in Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 15 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 0
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of
the 17 articles considered for inclusion, 8 diagnostic studies and 1 systematic review met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

324

ULTRASOUND
Diagnostic ultrasound has been used to evaluate adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder
(1650,1654,1674)
.
ULTRASOUND FOR EVALUATING ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Ultrasound is selectively recommended for adhesive capsulitis patients also suspected of
having rotator cuff tears, tendinoses, or impingement.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Ultrasound technicians should have sufficient skill to obviate the need for scanning (Boykin
et al., 2010) (Hanchard et al., 2013), otherwise the test introduces unnecessary redundancy.
Patients with adhesive capsulitis who also have symptoms and signs of a clinically significant
acute rotator cuff tear or subacute or chronic shoulder pain suspected of having a
symptomatic rotator cuff tear (Ardic et al., 2006) (Iannotti et al., 2005) (Wall et al., 2012)
(Naredo et al., 1999). Most clinical presentations should wait approximately 2 weeks prior
to imaging as some patients with acute pain and limited range of motion resolve clinically;
obvious major tears are an exception to waiting two weeks. Those with subacute or chronic
pain should generally have failed additional non-operative treatment including NSAID,
exercise and injection(s) (Ottenheijm et al., 2010). An MR arthrogram is recommended for
suspected labral injury (Ardic et al., 2006).
Benefits
Secure a diagnosis.
Harms
False positives and false negatives.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
Two comparative studies used MRI and suggested US has some utility in the diagnosis of
adhesive capsulitis (Park et al., 2017) (Sernik et al., 2019). Ultrasound also has utility to
identify some of the confounding or contributing conditions, such as rotator cuff
tendinopathy (See RC Tendinopathy) but does not well visualize other conditions such as
SLAP tears. Ultrasound is not invasive, is of low to moderate cost, and has little risk of
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

325

adverse effects; therefore, although there are concerns that MRI may be superior for
imaging most shoulder soft tissues, ultrasound is recommended particularly for evaluation
of rotator cuff tears as a complicating disorder for adhesive capsulitis. The main
disadvantage is the high dependency on the physician’s skills (Boykin et al., 2010) (Hanchard
et al., 2013).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Ultrasonography,
Ultrasound; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity,
specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests,
efficacy, and efficiency. We found and reviewed 1752 articles in PubMed using Most Recent
tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 1769
articles, 109 in Scopus, 15 in CINAHL, 8102 in Cochrane Library, 13,100 in Google Scholar,
and 2from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 1
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources. Of
the 7 articles considered for inclusion, 3 diagnostic studies and 1 systematic review met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SINGLE PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT)
Single-proton emission computed tomography (SPECT) is a 3-dimensional imaging
technique. Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) has been used for
shoulder-pain related complications (724).
SINGLE-PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT) FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation regarding SPECT scanning for the evaluation of patients with
Adhesive Capsulitis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
A large study of F-Fluoro-Deoxy-Glucose PET/computed tomography (F-FDG PET/CT) found
only 56% sensitivity (Sridharan et al., 2017), thus the diagnostic utility of PET/CT, if any, may
be quite limited. Additional studies are needed to determine if SPECT or PET adds something

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

326

to the diagnosis, treatment and outcomes beyond that obtained by a careful history,
physical examination, plain x-rays, and clinical impression before it can be recommended for
evaluating adhesive capsulitis.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Single Photon
Emission Computed Tomography, SPECT; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; diagnosis,
diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value,
predictive value of tests, efficacy, and efficiency. We found and reviewed 7 articles in
PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match
tab to find and review 7 articles, 3 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 819 in
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0
from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET)
Positron emission tomography has been used to diagnose adhesive capsulitis (1675,1676).
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET) FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation regarding PET for the evaluation of patients with adhesive
capsulitis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
A large study of F-Fluoro-Deoxy-Glucose PET/computed tomography (F-FDG PET/CT) found
only 56% sensitivity (Sridharan et al., 2017), thus the diagnostic utility of PET/CT, if any, may
be quite limited. Additional studies are needed to determine if SPECT or PET adds something
to the diagnosis, treatment and outcomes beyond that obtained by a careful history,
physical examination, plain x-rays, and clinical impression before it can be recommended for
evaluating adhesive capsulitis.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

327

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: positron emission
tomography, adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity,
specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests,
efficacy, and efficiency. We found and reviewed 32 articles in PubMed using Most Recent
tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 32
articles, 48 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 1530 in Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources†. We considered for inclusion 2 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL,
0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 2 articles
considered for inclusion, 2 diagnostic studies and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
INITIAL CARE
Initial care of adhesive capsulitis involves identification and treatment of potential
confounding conditions (e.g., diabetes mellitus, other medical disorders, rotator cuff
tendinopathies, etc.). Non-operative treatment has been traditionally recommended (617,1581,
1596,1677-1681)
. Educating the patient regarding the generally good long-term prognosis and
need to persist in performing progressive exercises is recommended. For patients with
significant pain, over-the-counter analgesics and self-applications of heat and ice are
recommended (1600,1606,1682,1683). Slings, braces and immobilizers tend to increase debility
while slowing recovery and are thus not recommended.
OTC analgesics are used for the treatment of adhesive capsulitis (1684,1685).
OTC ANALGESICS FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Over-the-counter analgesics are recommended for treatment of adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Adhesive capsulitis and other shoulder pain.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

328

Benefits
Self-management of the pain.
Harms
Negligible for OTC analgesics unless acetaminophen doses exceed 3. 5g, or the patient has
liver disease or another condition necessitating lower doses.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Analgesics should be used per manufacturer’s recommendations.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, lack of efficacy, intolerance, complication.
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating analgesics for managing adhesive capsulitis. However,
analgesics and OTC NSAIDs are likely helpful and there is some quality evidence for the use
of prescription NSAIDs for other shoulder nociceptive pain (see NSAIDs for rotator cuff
tendinopathy), thus they are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: nonprescription
analgesics, Acetaminophen, Analgesics, Nonprescription drugs, anti-inflammatory agents,
anti-inflammatory drugs, non-steroidal, over the counter analgesics; adhesive capsulitis,
frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 53 articles in PubMed, 14 in Scopus, 13 in CINAHL, 870 in Cochrane Library, 1,120
in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed,
0 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources. Of the 2 articles considered for inclusion, 0 randomized trials and 1
systematic review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

329

SELF-APPLICATION OF HEAT TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Self-application of heat is recommended for treatment of adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Adhesive capsulitis and associated injury(ies).
Benefits
Self-management of the pain.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Ice and heat are typically used 3-5 times a day.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, lack of efficacy, intolerance, complication.
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating analgesics, ice or heat for managing adhesive
capsulitis. Self-applications of heat and ice may be helpful for self-management of
symptoms, are not invasive, have low adverse effects, not costly, and are believed to be
helpful for treating symptoms; thus, they are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Heat, heat
therapy, self-application of heat; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical
trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 17 articles in PubMed, 91 in
Scopus, 9 in CINAHL, in 0 Cochrane Library, 13,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

330

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SELF-APPLICATION OF ICE FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Self-application of ice is recommended for treatment of adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Adhesive capsulitis and associated injury(ies).
Benefits
Self-management of the pain.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Ice and heat are typically used 3-5 times a day.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, lack of efficacy, intolerance, complication.
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating analgesics, ice or heat for managing adhesive
capsulitis. Self-applications of heat and ice may be helpful for self-management of
symptoms, are not invasive, have low adverse effects, not costly, and are believed to be
helpful for treating symptoms; thus, they are recommended.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

331

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Self-Application of
Ice, Application of Ice, Ice Application; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic
review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 2 articles in PubMed, 92
in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 224 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MEDICATIONS
Most medications have not been assessed in adhesive capsulitis patients. Thus, other than
where there is evidence noted, most guidance is based on inference from treatment of
rotator cuff tendinopathy and/or patients with general non-specific shoulder pain.
Over-the-counter medications may help manage pain associated with adhesive capsulitis.
Medications utilized include acetaminophen and NSAIDs (1580,1586,1686,1687), with NSAIDs
showing greater efficacy in treatment of other MSDs, but acetaminophen having a generally
greater safety profile. Opioids are not indicated other than for post-operative pain
management. Other medications that have been used to treat adhesive capsulitis include
glucosamine, chondroitin, methylsulfonylmethane, and topical agents such as capsaicin.
Oral glucocorticosteroids have also been utilized for treatment of adhesive capsulitis (16871690)
.
In the absence of quality evidence, it is recommended that the diagnosis of adhesive
capsulitis be managed according to the recommendations for Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy
and Shoulder Pain:
●
NSAIDs for Treatment of Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies and Shoulder Pain [Strongly
Recommended, Evidence (A)]
●
Acetaminophen for Acute, Subacute, Chronic, or Post-operative Shoulder Pain
[Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibiting Anti-depressants for Subacute or Chronic
Shoulder Girdle Pain [Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors for Acute, Subacute, or Chronic Shoulder
Pain and Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Anti-convulsants for Acute, Subacute or Chronic Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathies [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Capsicum Creams for Acute, Subacute, Chronic Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathy [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

332

●
Topical NSAIDs, including Diclofenac Epolamine for Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathy [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Topical Glyceryl Trinitrate, Lidocaine Patches, Eutectic Mixture of Local Anesthetics
(EMLA), and Other Creams/Ointments for Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy
[Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
See also the ACOEM Opioids guideline for the treatment of subacute and chronic pain.
ORAL GLUCOCORTICOSTEROIDS FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Oral glucocorticosteroids are selectively recommended for treatment of adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Adhesive capsulitis patients who decline glenohumeral glucocorticosteroid injection, as
results with injection appear superior (Widiastuti-Samekto et al., 2004).
Benefits
Improvements in adhesive capsulitis including range of motion.
Harms
Rare infection, short-term worsened diabetic control.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
The higher quality trial used triamcinolone 4mg PO TID for 1 week, then 4mg BID for 1 week,
then 4mg QD for 1 week (Widiastuti-Samekto et al., 2004). Another moderate-quality RCT
utilized cortisone acetate 50mg QID for 3 days, then 25mg QID until Day 14 (Blockey et al.,
1954). There are no head-to-head comparisons in quality studies of different oral
medications to ascertain either the optimum medication(s) or dose(s).
Indications for discontinuation
Generally only 1 course administered.
Rationale
One placebo-controlled trial suggested modest efficacy of oral steroids (Blockey et al.,
1954). However, another moderate-quality trial that compared injection with oral steroids
found substantially faster improvements with injections (Widiastuti-Samekto et al., 2004).
Oral glucocorticosteroids are not invasive, have adverse effects, and are low cost. As the
speed of recovery appears substantially faster via the injected route (Widiastuti-Samekto et
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

333

al., 2004), oral glucocorticosteroids are recommended only for patients who decline
injection.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Oral
Glucocorticosteroids, betamethasone, budesonide, cortisone, dexamethasone,
hydrocortisone, methylprednisolone; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical
trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 143 articles in PubMed, 67 in
Scopus, 25 in CINAHL, 638 in Cochrane Library, 12 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 5 articles
considered for inclusion, 2 randomized trial and 3 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ACTIVITY MODIFICATION AND EXERCISE
Therapy, including education and exercise, is thought to be particularly important, especially
for more severely affected patients with adhesive capsulitis. The duration of rehabilitation is
not specifically defined, yet there is strong belief in the importance of this exercise/
rehabilitation for treatment of adhesive capsulitis patients. Continuous passive motion
(CPM) also has been utilized for treatment of adhesive capsulitis as well as a post-surgical
treatment.
EDUCATION FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Prescriptions for services that include education are recommended for treatment of
adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence High
Indications
All adhesive capsulitis patients (Loew et al., 2005) (Lee et al., 1974) (Lee et al., 1973).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

334

Frequency/Dose/Duration
Education is needed, particularly to provide longer-term perspective regarding the need for
persistent advances in ROM and participation in activities, especially meaningful
employment, as a method for improving motion.

Frequency of appointments varies based on severity, compliance, need for encouragement,
comorbid conditions, and prior patient experiences.
Rationale
While there is no quality evidence on the value of education, it is believed to be needed to
especially provide longer-term perspective regarding the need for persistent advances in
ROM and participation in activities, especially meaningful employment, as a method for
improving motion.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Education, patient
education; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 81 articles in PubMed, 644 in Scopus, 18 in
CINAHL, 36 in Cochrane Library, 12,300 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 2 articles considered for
inclusion, 0 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
EXERCISE FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Prescriptions for exercise are recommended for treatment of adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence High
Indications

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

335

All adhesive capsulitis patients (Loew et al., 2005) (Lee et al., 1974) (Lee et al., 1973). Most
patients need formal therapy to help with graded increases in range of motion and then
institution of strengthening exercises.
Benefits
Improved range of motion and reduction in pain.
Harms
Negligible other than some pain with exercises.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Progressive passive ROM exercises (Nicholson, 1985) (van der Windt et al., 1998), including
a home exercise program (HEP) are thought to be essential to successful treatment of
adhesive capsulitis.
Frequency of appointments varies based on severity, compliance, need for encouragement,
comorbid conditions, and prior patient experiences. ROM exercises are the primary
exercises for this disorder, although they are typically followed by isometric strengthening
program, then isotonic strengthening and endurance exercises. Options include weekly
appointments to oversee and advance a home exercise program for several weeks until
sufficient recovered for lower grade injuries and self-motivated patients. Patients with a
more severe case or need of supervision may require appointments 2 to 3 per week to
initiate program exercises, tapering to 1 per week in approximately 4 weeks before being
discharged to a home exercise program in approximately 2 months for more severe injuries.
Total numbers of appointments among those severely affected can often be ~15-20.
Additional appointments should be based on objective, incremental functional gains.
Results of the exercise prescription should be regularly monitored and failure to
progressively improve is an indication to either revisit the differential diagnosis and/or seek
a second opinion/consultation, particularly by the time approximately 6-12 therapy
appointments is reached.
Indications for discontinuation
Recovery, plateau in recovery, noncompliance, or intolerance.
Rationale
There are many quality trials evaluating exercise, education, and/or therapy for adhesive
capsulitis, although few compare exercise or physiotherapy with no treatment. Overall
details vary in the available trials. One moderate-quality trial comparing exercise plus
placebo injection compared with placebo injection suggested modestly better effects with
exercise (Ryans et al., 2005), although the same trial suggested glucocorticoid injections are

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

336

superior. There are three moderate-quality trials suggesting injections are superior to
physiotherapy (Carette et al., 2003) (van der Windt et al., 1998) (Ryans et al., 2005) (see
graph in injections below) and one lower quality study suggesting equal efficacy (Dacre et
al., 1989). There is evidence that arthrographic distension with steroid plus exercise is
superior to exercise alone (Khan et al., 2005). One moderate-quality trial suggested exercise
in combination with either electroacupuncture or interferential therapy is superior to no
treatment (Cheing et al., 2008). Exercise is not invasive, has low adverse effects, and is of
moderate cost for aggregate appointments. There is quality evidence of efficacy for
treatment of adhesive capsulitis, thus exercise and therapy are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: post-operative
exercise, post-operative rehabilitation, rehabilitation program, rehabilitation, postoperative period, exercise therapy; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical
trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 11 articles in PubMed, 17 in
Scopus, 3 in CINAHL, 21 in Cochrane Library, 18,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 2 articles
considered for inclusion, 0 randomized trials and 1 systematic review met the inclusion
criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: General exercise,
exercise, exercise therapy; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 217 articles in PubMed, 2,074 in
Scopus, 97 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane Library, 15,700 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 5 from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 8 articles
considered for inclusion, 7 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Strengthening
Exercises, Resistance Training, Weight-Lifting; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 15 articles in
PubMed, 34 in Scopus, 4 in CINAHL, 36 in Cochrane Library, 20300 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 2 from PubMed, 3 from Scopus, 1 from
CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane Library, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 9

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

337

articles considered for inclusion, 5 randomized trials and 4 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Range of motion
exercise, articular range of motion; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical
trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 410 articles in PubMed, 1,378 in
Scopus, 13 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane Library, 260 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources. Of the 7 articles
considered for inclusion, 5 randomized trials and 1 systematic review met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SLINGS FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Not Recommended
Slings and braces are not recommended for treatment of adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Rationale
There are no quality studies of the use of slings for adhesive capsulitis. Importantly, instead
of inactivity, adhesive capsulitis is treated with increased range of motion. Slings, braces and
immobilizers are believed to be risks for, and potentially aggravate, adhesive capsulitis by
reducing range of motion. A sling is also generally not recommended after injections,
hydrodilatation, or post-operatively as immediate ROM is desired. Thus, slings, braces and
immobilizers are not recommended for patients with adhesive capsulitis.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Slings, Braces,
Shoulder Supports; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled
trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation,
random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

338

retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 283 articles in PubMed, 132 in
Scopus, 2 in CINAHL, 103 in Cochrane Library, 20500 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ALLIED HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
Therapy, including education and exercise, is thought to be particularly important, especially
for more severely affected patients with adhesive capsulitis. The duration of rehabilitation is
not specifically defined, yet there is strong belief in the importance of this exercise/
rehabilitation for treatment of adhesive capsulitis patients. Continuous passive motion
(CPM) also has been utilized for treatment of adhesive capsulitis as well as a post-surgical
treatment.
COGNITIVE BEHAVIORAL THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Cognitive behavioral therapy is recommended for treatment of adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
All adhesive capsulitis patients, especially those moderately or severely affected. Also
particularly indicated for those who fail to improve and/or have significant range of motion
limitations and fear avoidant beliefs.
Benefits
Improved clinical course trajectory, including range of motion and reduction in pain.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

339

CBT psychotherapy provided either independently or as a component therapy integrated
into a program that includes physical therapy. CBT should normally be limited to 6 sessions
or less initially. Additional appointments may be needed, especially for those with a more
severe condition or slower clinical progress. Provision of additional appointments should be
contingent on compliance with the requirements from the initial set of appointments. When
therapy is provided as a component of an interdisciplinary or functional restoration
program, the number of sessions is based on the needs of the program to provide relevant
treatment objectives.
Indications for discontinuation
Recovery, plateau in recovery, or noncompliance.
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating cognitive behavioral therapy for the treatment of
adhesive capsulitis. However, it has been shown to be effective in many other
musculoskeletal conditions and thus is recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Cognitive
Behavioral Therapy, Cognitive Therapy; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic
review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0 articles in PubMed, 6
in Scopus, 1 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 10700 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PHYSICAL THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Prescriptions for instruction and physical therapy services are recommended for treatment
of adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence High

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

340

Indications
All adhesive capsulitis patients (Loew et al., 2005) (Lee et al., 1974) (Lee et al., 1973). Most
patients need formal therapy to help with graded increases in range of motion and then
institution of strengthening exercises.
Benefits
Improved range of motion and reduction in pain.
Harms
Negligible other than some pain with exercises.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Progressive passive ROM exercises (Nicholson, 1985) (van der Windt et al., 1998), including
a home exercise program (HEP) are thought to be essential to successful treatment of
adhesive capsulitis.
Frequency of appointments varies based on severity, compliance, need for encouragement,
comorbid conditions, and prior patient experiences. ROM exercises are the primary
exercises for this disorder, although they are typically followed by isometric strengthening
program, then isotonic strengthening and endurance exercises. Options include weekly
appointments to oversee and advance a home exercise program for several weeks until
sufficient recovered for lower grade injuries and self-motivated patients. Patients with a
more severe case or need of supervision may require appointments 2 to 3 per week to
initiate program exercises, tapering to 1 per week in approximately 4 weeks before being
discharged to a home exercise program in approximately 2 months for more severe injuries.
total numbers of appointments among those severely affected can often be ~15-20.
Additional appointments should be based on objective, incremental functional gains.
Results of the exercise prescription should be regularly monitored and failure to
progressively improve is an indication to either revisit the differential diagnosis and/or seek
a second opinion/consultation, particularly by the time approximately 6-12 therapy
appointments is reached.
Indications for discontinuation
Recovery, plateau in recovery, noncompliance, or intolerance.
Rationale
There are many quality trials evaluating exercise, education, and/or therapy for adhesive
capsulitis, although few compare exercise or physiotherapy with no treatment. Overall
details vary in the available trials. One moderate-quality trial comparing exercise plus
placebo injection compared with placebo injection suggested modestly better effects with

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

341

exercise (Ryans et al., 2005), although the same trial suggested glucocorticoid injections are
superior. There are three moderate-quality trials suggesting injections are superior to
physiotherapy (Carette et al., 2003) (van der Windt et al., 1998) (Ryans et al., 2005) (see
graph in injections below) and one lower quality study suggesting equal efficacy (Dacre et
al., 1989). There is evidence that arthrographic distension with steroid plus exercise is
superior to exercise alone (Khan et al., 2005). One moderate-quality trial suggested exercise
in combination with either electroacupuncture or interferential therapy is superior to no
treatment (Cheing et al., 2008). Exercise is not invasive, has low adverse effects, and is of
moderate cost for aggregate appointments. There is quality evidence of efficacy for
treatment of adhesive capsulitis, thus exercise and therapy are recommended. While there
is no quality evidence on the value of education, it is believed to be needed to especially
provide longer-term perspective regarding the need for persistent advances in ROM and
participation in activities, especially meaningful employment, as a method for improving
motion.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Physical Therapy,
Physiotherapy, Physical Therapy Modalities; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic
review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 324 articles in PubMed,
1000 in Scopus, 98 in CINAHL, 105 in Cochrane Library, 17900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from
other sources†. We considered for inclusion 8 from PubMed, 7 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL,
0 from Cochrane Library, 3 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 18 articles
considered for inclusion, 9 randomized trials and 4 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MIRROR THERAPY FOR THE TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Mirror therapy is recommended for treatment of adhesive capsulitis as an adjunct to
therapy including an exercise program.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

342

Adhesive capsulitis, especially among those with range of motion limitations, lack of
progress with therapy, and fear avoidant beliefs.
Benefits
Improved range of motion, function and pain reduction.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
10 sessions were used in a successful trial (Başkaya et al., 2018). Subsequent sets of 6-10
appointments should be based on incremental gains yet failing to achieve either a plateau
and/or normal range of motion.
Indications for discontinuation
Normal range of motion, achieving a plateau, failure to achieve incremental gains, noncompliance.
Rationale
A moderate quality trial found additive benefits of mirror therapy to (Başkaya et al., 2018).
Mirror therapy is non-invasive, has negligible adverse effects, is low cost as an adjunct to
therapy, and has evidence of efficacy and is thus recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Mirror Therapy;
adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 3 articles in PubMed, 6 in Scopus, 2 in CINAHL, 7 in Cochrane
Library, 3,270 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

343

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
CONTINUOUS PASSIVE MOTION FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Continuous passive motion (CPM) is selectively recommended in conjunction with a home
exercise program for treatment, but only for those with moderate to severe adhesive
capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Moderate to severely affected adhesive capsulitis patients.
Benefits
Improved range of motion and reduction in pain.
Harms
Negligible other than some pain with exercises.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
CPM for 1 hour per day, 5 days per week for 20 appointments, combined with a daily home
exercise program of progressive stretching and pendulum exercises; additional supervised
physical or occupational therapy appointments may be needed for more severely affected
patients (see above).
Indications for discontinuation
Recovery, plateau in recovery, noncompliance, or intolerance.
Rationale
There is limited evidence from one moderate-quality trial that CPM plus a home exercise
program of stretching and pendulum exercises may be superior to conventional
physiotherapy plus the same home exercise program. This trial suggested CPM is superior to
conventional physiotherapy for pain relief at both 4 and 12 weeks follow-up. CPM is not
invasive, has low adverse effects, is moderately costly in aggregate appointments, has some
quality evidence of efficacy, and thus is recommended.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

344

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Continuous
Passive Motion, CPM, Motion Therapy, Continuous Passive; adhesive capsulitis, frozen
shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly,
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed
30 articles in PubMed, 2 in Scopus, 37 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 15900 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 0 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 1 article considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MOBILIZATION FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Mobilization is moderately recommended for the treatment of adhesive capsulitis, in
combination with a multi-modal approach of exercise and patient education.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Adhesive capsulitis, especially moderate to severely affected patients with pain and loss of
active motion who do not respond sufficiently to NSAIDs, and steroid injection(s) (Loew et
al., 2005) (Quraishi et al., 2007).
Benefits
Improved range of motion.
Harms
Post-procedure pain.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally 1 to 2 appointments a week with intervening home exercises for 3 to 4 weeks.
High-grade mobilization techniques are particularly recommended (Vermeulen et al., 2006).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

345

Additional 2 sets of up to 8 appointments based on ongoing objective improvements in the
condition and ROM. A maximum of 24 appointments has been suggested ((Vermeulen et al.,
2006). Some patients will not readily tolerate mobilization of the shoulder without
anesthesia; in such cases additional mobilization treatments are not recommended.
Encourage patients to use the affected shoulder whenever possible (Vermeulen et al.,
2006), and continue home exercises and education.
Indications for discontinuation
Recovery, plateau in recovery, noncompliance with exercise program, intolerance.
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating mobilization or manual therapy to a sham. However,
one high-quality trial suggested high-grade mobilizations are modestly superior to lowgrade mobilizations (Vermeulen et al., 2006), thus supporting an evidence-based graded
recommendation for use of mobilizations for treatment of adhesive capsulitis. One trial
comparing mobilizations with injection and cold therapy appears underpowered to detect
differences (Bulgen et al., 1984). The other available quality trials include manipulation
under anesthesia (MUA); many others included mobilization or manual therapy as part of
physiotherapy, thus precluding assessment of its independent benefits. For those who can
tolerate it, mobilization or manual therapy without anesthesia may be beneficial and
without some of the considerable adverse effects documented with MUA (Loew et al.,
2005). Mobilization and manual therapy of the shoulder are not invasive, have low adverse
effects, are moderately costly for aggregate appointments, and have evidence suggesting
efficacy. Thus, mobilization and manual therapy of the shoulder for adhesive capsulitis is
recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Mobilization,
Manual Therapy; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled
trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation,
random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 180 articles in PubMed, 1,733 in
Scopus, 93 in CINAHL, 105 in Cochrane Library, 7,090 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 16 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 12 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 5 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources. Of the 36 articles
considered for inclusion, 28 randomized trials and 5 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

346

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANUAL THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Manual therapy is moderately recommended for the treatment of adhesive capsulitis, in
combination with a multi-modal approach of exercise and patient education.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Adhesive capsulitis, especially moderate to severely affected patients with pain and loss of
active motion who do not respond sufficiently to NSAIDs, and steroid injection(s) (Loew et
al., 2005) (Quraishi et al., 2007).
Benefits
Improved range of motion.
Harms
Post-procedure pain.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Mobilization and/or manual therapy generally 1 to 2 appointments a week with intervening
home exercises for 3 to 4 weeks. High-grade mobilization techniques are particularly
recommended (Vermeulen et al., 2006). Additional 2 sets of up to 8 appointments based on
ongoing objective improvements in the condition and ROM. A maximum of 24
appointments has been suggested (Vermeulen et al., 2006). Some patients will not readily
tolerate mobilization of the shoulder without anesthesia; in such cases additional
mobilization treatments are not recommended. Encourage patients to use the affected
shoulder whenever possible (Vermeulen et al., 2006), and continue home exercises and
education.
Indications for discontinuation
Recovery, plateau in recovery, noncompliance with exercise program, intolerance.
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating mobilization or manual therapy to a sham. However,
one high-quality trial suggested high-grade mobilizations are modestly superior to low-

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

347

grade mobilizations (Vermeulen et al., 2006), thus supporting an evidence-based graded
recommendation for use of mobilizations for treatment of adhesive capsulitis. One trial
comparing mobilizations with injection and cold therapy appears underpowered to detect
differences (Bulgen et al., 1984). The other available quality trials include manipulation
under anesthesia (MUA); many others included mobilization or manual therapy as part of
physiotherapy, thus precluding assessment of its independent benefits. For those who can
tolerate it, mobilization or manual therapy without anesthesia may be beneficial and
without some of the considerable adverse effects documented with MUA (Loew et al.,
2005). Mobilization and manual therapy of the shoulder are not invasive, have low adverse
effects, are moderately costly for aggregate appointments, and have evidence suggesting
efficacy. Thus, mobilization and manual therapy of the shoulder for adhesive capsulitis is
recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Mobilization,
Manual Therapy; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled
trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation,
random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 180 articles in PubMed, 1,733 in
Scopus, 93 in CINAHL, 105 in Cochrane Library, 7,090 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 16 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 12 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 5 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources. Of the 36 articles
considered for inclusion, 28 randomized trials and 5 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANIPULATION UNDER ANESTHESIA FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS IN
SELECT PATIENTS
Recommended
Manipulation under anesthesia is recommended for treatment of adhesive capsulitis in
select patients.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

348

Adhesive capsulitis, especially moderate to severely affected patients with pain and loss of
active motion who do not respond sufficiently to NSAIDs, steroid injection(s), and
hydrodilatation (Loew et al., 2005) (Quraishi et al., 2007).
Benefits
Improved range of motion.
Harms
Complications of anesthesia, post-procedure pain, hemarthrosis, localized or disseminated
synovitis, capsule rupture, SLAP tears, proximal humerus fracture, rotator cuff tear, and
articular damage (Loew et al., 2005).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally, only 1 treatment performed; adequate, safe monitoring of anesthesia is required.
A second procedure would be potentially recommended based on incremental gain from
the first but an incomplete and insufficiently satisfactory result. Treatment should be
combined with post-procedure exercises.
Rationale
There are a few quality trials evaluating MUA for adhesive capsulitis (Quraishi et al., 2007)
(Kivimaki et al., 2007) (Jacobs et al., 2009). The highest moderate-quality studies suggested
modest benefits when comparing MUA with physiotherapy to physiotherapy alone and
suggested modest improvements in ROM (Kivimaki et al., 2007). A moderate-quality trial
suggested that injections are of comparable efficacy to MUA (Jacobs et al., 2009). Another
moderate-quality trial suggested that hydrodilatation is superior to MUA (Quraishi et al.,
2007). One moderate-quality trial assessed adjunctive use of intra-articular
glucocorticosteroid and found no evidence of benefit of the steroid (Kivimaki et al., 2001).
MUA is minimally invasive, except for the anesthesia, but has documented adverse effects
(Loew et al., 2005), and is high cost. MUA is recommended for selective use in patients who
fail other treatments with documented efficacy, but who have lower risks for adverse
effects.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Manipulation
under Anesthesia, MUA; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 72 articles in PubMed, 484 in
Scopus, 27 in CINAHL, 48 in Cochrane Library, 5390 in Google Scholar, and 4 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from PubMed, 7 from Scopus, 2 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 16 from Google Scholar, and 4 from other sources. Of the 46 articles

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

349

considered for inclusion, 11 randomized trials and 2 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ACUPUNCTURE FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS IN SELECT PATIENTS
Recommended
Acupuncture is recommended for selective treatment of adhesive capsulitis patients.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Adhesive capsulitis, especially moderate to severely affected patients with pain and loss of
motion. Generally, used among those who do not respond sufficiently to NSAIDs, steroid
injection(s), and hydrodilatation (Loew et al., 2005) (Quraishi et al., 2007), although some
patients may prefer acupuncture to injection and hydrodilatation which also may be
reasonable. Should be accompanied by an active exercise program (Lathia et al., 2009) (Sun
et al., 2001).
Benefits
Modest improvements in pain and range of motion.
Harms
Negligible in experienced hands. Has been associated with deep structure punctures and
lacerations particularly in inexperienced hands.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Regimens vary widely in quality trials. An initial trial of 4 appointments appears reasonable
combined with a conditioning program of aerobic and strengthening exercises. An
additional 4 appointments should be tied to improvements in objective measures after first
4 treatments, for a total of 8 appointments (de Hoyos et al., 2004). Subsequent batches of 4
appointments should be based on ongoing incremental increases in objective measures
such as range of motion.
Indications for discontinuation

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

350

Recovery, plateau in recovery, noncompliance with exercise program, intolerance.
Rationale
There are a few moderate-quality trials of acupuncture that appear to have included
adhesive capsulitis patients (Lathia et al., 2009) (Sun et al., 2001) (Cheing et al., 2008) (Berry
et al., 1980). One moderate-quality trial found acupuncture superior to sham acupuncture
(Lathia et al., 2009). A second moderate-quality trial suggested exercise plus acupuncture
was superior to acupuncture alone (Sun et al., 2001). However, one lower quality trial
suggested there was no difference between electroacupuncture plus exercise and
interferential plus exercise (Cheing et al., 2008) and the lowest quality study appears to
have found no benefit of acupuncture compared with placebo (Berry et al., 1980).
Acupuncture is minimally invasive, has minor adverse effects provided needles are not
inserted deeply, is moderately costly in aggregate, and the highest quality studies suggest
benefits. Therefore, acupuncture is selectively recommended as an adjunct to an active
exercise program in patients failing other treatments with documented efficacy.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Acupuncture,
Acupuncture Therapy, Acupuncture Analgesia, Acupuncture Points; adhesive capsulitis,
frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 67 articles in PubMed, 583 in Scopus, 23 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 3,890 in
Google Scholar, and 5 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 3 from PubMed, 4
from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 6 from Google Scholar, and 5 from
other sources. Of the 18 articles considered for inclusion, 14 randomized trials and 3
systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MAGNETS FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Not Recommended
Magnetic stimulation and magnets have been used to treat adhesive capsulitis (Kanai et al.,
2004).
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

351

Level of confidence High
Rationale
One moderate-quality trial suggests magnets are not effective (Leclaire et al., 1991).
Magnets are not recommended as there is no quality evidence of efficacy. They also have
been shown to be ineffective for treatment of other musculoskeletal disorders.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Magnets,
Magnetic Stimulation, Magnetic Field Therapy; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 4 articles in
PubMed, 417 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 1,590 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources. Of the 2
articles considered for inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
TAPING OR KINESIOTAPING FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Not Recommended
Taping or kinesiotaping is not recommended for the treatment of adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies assessing efficacy of taping or kinesiotaping. There are three
RCTs, all with sparse methods and other methodological problems. One included multiple
co-interventions, precluding an assessment of efficacy (Sinaj et al., 2015). One suggests
kinesiotaping is superior to ultrasound (Jindal, 2018). Another suggested comparability with
shockwave (Choi JH, 2017). Taping is generally not indicated for conditions where increasing
range of motion is the prime objective, and thus it is not recommended.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

352

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Taping, Athletic
Taping, Kinesiotaping, Taping or Strapping, Athletic Tape; adhesive capsulitis, frozen
shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly,
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 5
articles in PubMed, 18 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 3030 in Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 8 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of
the 8 articles considered for inclusion, 8 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ULTRASOUND FOR EVALUATING ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Ultrasound is selectively recommended for adhesive capsulitis patients also suspected of
having rotator cuff tears, tendinoses, or impingement.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Ultrasound technicians should have sufficient skill to obviate the need for scanning (Boykin
et al., 2010, Hanchard et al., 2013); otherwise, the test introduces unnecessary redundancy.
Patients with adhesive capsulitis who also have symptoms and signs of a clinically significant
acute rotator cuff tear or subacute or chronic shoulder pain suspected of having a
symptomatic rotator cuff tear (Iannotti et al., 2005, Wall et al., 2012, Naredo et al.,
1999)(Ardic et al., 2006). Most clinical presentations should wait approximately 2 weeks
prior to imaging as some patients with acute pain and limited range of motion resolve
clinically; obvious major tears are an exception to waiting two weeks. Those with subacute
or chronic pain should generally have failed additional non-operative treatment including
NSAID, exercise and injection(s) (Ottenheijm et al., 2010). An MR arthrogram is
recommended for suspected labral injury (see MRA) (Ardic et al., 2006).
Benefits

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

353

Secure a diagnosis.
Harms
False positives and false negatives.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
Two comparative studies used MRI and suggested US has some utility in the diagnosis of
adhesive capsulitis (Park et al., 2017, Sernik et al., 2019). Ultrasound also has utility to
identify some of the confounding or contributing conditions, such as rotator cuff
tendinopathy (See RC Tendinopathy) but does not well visualize other conditions such as
SLAP tears. Ultrasound is not invasive, is of low to moderate cost, and has little risk of
adverse effects; therefore, although there are concerns that MRI may be superior for
imaging most shoulder soft tissues, ultrasound is recommended particularly for evaluation
of rotator cuff tears as a complicating disorder for adhesive capsulitis. The main
disadvantage is the high dependency on the physician’s skills (Boykin et al., 2010, Hanchard
et al., 2013).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Ultrasonography,
Ultrasound; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity,
specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests,
efficacy, and efficiency. We found and reviewed 1752 articles in PubMed using Most Recent
tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 1769
articles, 109 in Scopus, 15 in CINAHL, 8102 in Cochrane Library, 13,100 in Google Scholar,
and 2from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 1
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources. Of
the 7 articles considered for inclusion, 3 diagnostic studies and 1 systematic review met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

354

ELECTRICAL THERAPIES
SHORTWAVE DIATHERMY FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Shortwave diathermy is recommended for the treatment of adhesive capsulitis (Leung et al.,
2008).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Adhesive capsulitis of at least 8 weeks duration (Leung et al., 2008); consideration but not a
requirement of inadequate response to injection.
Benefits
Modest improvements in adhesive capsulitis.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Three times a week up to 4 weeks (Leung et al., 2008) which should be combined with
exercises (Leung et al., 2008).
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution, sufficient improvement, intolerance, noncompliance with exercises.
Rationale
A trial suggested significant improvements in frozen shoulder with diathermy (Leung et al.,
2008). Diathemy is not invasive, has negligible adverse effects, is moderate cost in aggregate
and is thus recommended for treatment of adhesive capsulitis.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Shortwave
Diathermy; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 3 articles in PubMed, 47 in Scopus, 3 in

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

355

CINAHL, 6 in Cochrane Library, 152 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane
Library, 3 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 4 articles considered for
inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
INTERFERENTIAL THERAPY FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for interferential therapy.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies and thus there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Interferential
Therapy, Interferential Current Electrotherapy, Electric Stimulation Therapy, adhesive
capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 38 articles in PubMed, 247 in Scopus, 2 in CINAHL, 25 in Cochrane
Library, 520 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 1 article considered for inclusion, 1 randomized
trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

356

HIGH-VOLTAGE GALVANIC STIMULATION FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for high-voltage galvanic stimulation.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies and thus there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: High-Voltage
Pulsed Galvanic Stimulation, High Voltage Galvanic Stimulation, High-Voltage Galvanism,
High-Voltage Galvanic; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0 articles in PubMed, 0 in
Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 121 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
H-WAVE® DEVICE STIMULATION FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for H-Wave® Device stimulation for treatment of adhesive
capsulitis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies and thus there is no recommendation.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

357

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: H-wave Device
Stimulation; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective,
prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0 articles in PubMed, 0 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL,
0 in Cochrane Library, 2 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
IONTOPHORESIS FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for use of iontophoresis for treatment of adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
There are no quality studies and thus there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Iontophoresis;
adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 2 articles in PubMed, 77 in Scopus, 2 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 553 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0
from PubMed, 2 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 3 articles considered for inclusion, 0 randomized
trials and 1 systematic review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

358

reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MICROCURRENT STIMULATION FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for microcurrent stimulation for adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies and thus there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Microcurrent,
microcurrent electrical stimulation; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical
trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0 articles in PubMed, 21 in
Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 67 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from
Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PERCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION (PENS) FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for PENS for treatment of adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

359

There are no quality studies and thus there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Percutaneous
Electrical Nerve Stimulation (PENS) OR Percutaneous Neuromodulation Therapy (PNT);
adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 27 articles in PubMed, 0 in Scopus, 4 in CINAHL, 2 in Cochrane
Library, 109 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SYMPATHETIC ELECTROTHERAPY FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for sympathetic electrotherapy for adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies and thus there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Sympathetic
Electrotherapy, Sympathetic Electrical Stimulation Therapy, Sympathetic Therapy; adhesive
capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 3 articles in PubMed, 8 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 2 in Cochrane
Library, 4580 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

360

from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
TRANSCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION (TENS) FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for TENS for adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies assessing efficacy of TENS and thus there is no
recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Transcutaneous
Electrical Nerve Stimulation; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 27 articles in PubMed, 320 in
Scopus, 4 in CINAHL, 45 in Cochrane Library, 4,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources. Of the 2 articles
considered for inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

361

EXTRACORPOREAL SHOCKWAVE THERAPY (ECT) FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Extracorporeal shockwave therapy is recommended for treatment of adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Moderate to severe adhesive capsulitis, generally after institution of an exercise program
with insufficient results to improve range of motion and function, typically after at least 2-3
weeks.
Benefits
Improved pain and range of motion.
Harms
Increased pain.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
4 applications 1 week apart (Hussein et al., 2016).
Indications for discontinuation
Intolerance, non-compliance.
Rationale
Two sham-controlled trials suggested efficacy of EWST (Hussein et al., 2016) (Vahdatpour et
al., 2014), and one showed durable efficacy to 24 weeks (Hussein et al., 2016). Another trial
suggested superiority of EWST to oral steroid (Chen et al., 2014). EWST is not invasive and
has low adverse effects. Though EWST is high cost, it has evidence of efficacy and is thus
recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Extracorporeal
Shockwave Therapy, ESWT, Ultrasonic Therapy, Shockwave Therapy; adhesive capsulitis,
frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 5 articles in PubMed, 58 in Scopus, 21 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane Library, 789 in
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

362

Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 2 from PubMed, 6
from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 7 from Google Scholar, and 1 from
other sources. Of the 17 articles considered for inclusion, 6 randomized trials and 1
systematic review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ELECTRICAL MUSCLE STIMULATION (EMS) FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendations for electrical muscle stimulation for treatment of adhesive
capsulitis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: electrical muscle
stimulation, neuromuscular electrical stimulation, EMS, NMES; adhesive capsulitis, frozen
shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly,
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 3
articles in PubMed, 43 in Scopus, 6 in CINAHL, 9 in Cochrane Library, 13900 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

363

PULSED ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD THERAPY FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for pulsed electromagnetic field therapy.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies and thus there is no recommendation for pulsed
electromagnetic field therapy.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Pulsed
Electromagnetic Field, Pulsed Electromagnetic Field Therapy, PEMF, REMF Therapy, Low
Field Magnetic Stimulation, LFMS; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical
trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 9 articles in PubMed, 58 in
Scopus, 3 in CINAHL, 10 in Cochrane Library, 1,130 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
HIGH-INTENSITY LASER THERAPY FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
High-intensity laser therapy (HILT) is selectively recommended for treatment of adhesive
capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

364

Adhesive capsulitis and should generally have failed at least 3 weeks of exercises and at
least one glucocorticosteroid injection.
Benefits
Improved pain, resolution of the disorder.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Three sessions for 3 weeks. Should be co-administered with exercises (Kim, 2015) (Atan,
2021).
Indications for discontinuation
Intolerance, non-compliance.
Rationale
There are few quality studies of HILT. One trial suggests superiority of HILT to sham (Kim,
2015). A second trial suggested HILT plus exercises were superior to same HILT plus exercise
and also superior to exercises alone (Atan, 2021). HILT is not invasive and has negligible
adverse effects, with some studies suggesting efficacy. Thus, it is selectively recommended
for those who fail exercises and prior glucocorticoid injection(s).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Other physical
methods, physical methods; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 594 articles in PubMed, 2,380 in
Scopus, 46 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 1,310 in Google Scholar, and 4 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 3 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 4 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 4 from other sources. Of the 11 articles
considered for inclusion, 4 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

365

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

INJECTION THERAPIES
Glucocorticoid injections are commonly performed for treatment of adhesive capsulitis.
Suprascapular nerve blocks, platelet-rich plasma, and viscosupplementation injections also
have been used to treat adhesive capsulitis. Hydrodilatation, also known as distension
arthrography, involves an injection into the glenohumeral joint under pressure and has been
utilized to treat adhesive capsulitis with the intent to rupture contractures. Hydrodilatation
has been performed and accomplished variously as an isolated intervention, accompanied
by arthrography, or accompanied by manipulation under anesthesia, as well as with
arthroscopy.
See also Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy.
GLUCOCORTICOID INJECTIONS FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Glucocorticoid injections are strongly recommended for treatment of adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Strongly Recommended, Evidence (A)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Moderate or severe adhesive capsulitis (Loew et al., 2005), or mild cases with insufficient
control or progression. Generally, at least 2-3 weeks of exercise without evidence of
improvement would be indicated prior to injection due to the natural tendency to improve.
Benefits
Improved pain and range of motion.
Harms
Rare infection, lack of response, short term worsened diabetic control.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
One injection, one set of injections (both intraarticular and Subacromial (Cho C-H, 2016) or
one set of injections at three sites (posterior capsule, subacromial and subcoracoid)
(Pushpasekaran et al., 2017) is recommended. The results should be assessed prior to
another potential injection(s). Variable approaches have been used, as injections have been
performed in the:
(1) glenohumeral joint (Jacobs et al., 2009)
(2) subacromial space (Valtonen, 1974) (De Jong et al., 1998),
(3) using 2 injection points (Ryans et al., 2005), as well as
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

366

(4) targeting the shoulder capsule (Dacre et al., 1989).
One trial suggested no differences in outcomes between bursal injections and intra-articular
injections (Rizk et al., 1991). There are no quality trials comparing these different
approaches.
A second injection may be reasonable, particularly if the initial results are partial but
insufficient. Subsequent injection(s) should generally be based on objective evidence of
progress attributable to the injection(s), but with insufficient or incomplete results. If an
initial injection is unsuccessful, another injection with a different approach is suggested. A
third injection is not recommended if there is not objective response to the 2 prior
injections.
An injection is recommended to be combined with exercises (Carette et al., 2003).
Quality trials have utilized:
●
Triamcinolone hexacetonide 40mg (Carette et al., 2003),
●
Triamcinolone acetonide 10mg (De Jong et al., 1998) (see note immediately below),
●
Triamcinolone acetonide 20mg (Yoon et al., 2013) and
●
Triamcinolone acetonide 40mg (van der Windt et al., 1998) (De Jong et al., 1998)
(Yoon et al., 2013).
One high-quality trial suggested triamcinolone acetonide 10mg was inferior to 40mg, thus,
triamcinolone acetonide 40mg is the recommended dose for that glucocorticoid (De Jong et
al., 1998).
Trials have both used:
(i) fluoroscopy (Carette et al., 2003),
(ii) ultrasound (Lee et al., 2009), and
(iii) no imaging for the injection(s).
There is only one study suggesting better results with ultrasound than blind injections (Lee
et al., 2009), resulting in limited evidence on the question of the utility and/or need of
imaging. Thus, both blind and image-guided injections are acceptable.
Indications for discontinuation
Recovery, plateau in recovery, intolerance.
Rationale
There are multiple high- and moderate-quality trials that have evaluated glucocorticoid
injections for treatment of adhesive capsulitis. The highest quality trial found the injection
group or the injection plus physiotherapy groups to be superior to the saline injection group
or the saline group plus physiotherapy (Carette et al., 2003). The next highest quality trial
suggests injections are more effective than physiotherapy (Ryans et al., 2005). Other studies

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

367

have found no differences in corticosteroid injections compared with NSAID (Dehghan et al.,
2013) and hyaluranoic acid (Park et al., 2013). A quality trial suggested superior results with
injection compared with oral steroids (Widiastuti-Samekto et al., 2004). Two studies conflict
regarding superiority compared with NSAIDs (Shin et al., 2013, Dehghan et al., 2013). One
trial suggested combined intraarticular and subacromial steroid injection was superior,
suggesting the subacromial space was contributory to the pathology and that a combined
approach should be used (Cho C-H, 2016). Steroid injections are invasive, have some
adverse effects, and are moderately costly. However, they appear quite effective and thus
are recommended for treatment of adhesive capsulitis. Injection should be combined with
range of motion and other exercises for the best results (Carette et al., 2003).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Subacromial
Glucocorticosteroid Injections, Subacromial Glucocorticoid Injections; adhesive capsulitis,
frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial,
randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization,
randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and
reviewed 31 articles in PubMed, 340 in Scopus, 1 in CINAHL, 10 in Cochrane Library, 308 in
Google Scholar, and 22 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 3 from PubMed, 3
from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 22 from
other sources. Of the 29 articles considered for inclusion, 24 randomized trials and 4
systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SUPRASCAPULAR NERVE BLOCKS FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Suprascapular nerve blocks are recommended for treatment of adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Adhesive capsulitis, moderate or severe cases; failure of adequate response with NSAIDs,
exercises, and glucocorticosteroid injection(s).
Benefits

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

368

Improved pain and range of motion
Harms
Failure to improve and medicalization
Frequency/Dose/Duration
One block is recommended and results assessed. Patients should be given range of motion
and conditioning exercises to perform (Dahan et al., 2000). A second block may be
recommended if there is a partial, but inadequate response to initial block. The quality trial
utilized bupivacaine 0. 5%, 10mL.
Rationale
One moderate-quality trial suggests suprascapular nerve block efficacy compared with a
placebo block for treatment of adhesive capsulitis (Dahan et al., 2000). A trial suggested
equivalence between a steroid injection and a block (Verma et al., 2019). Another trial that
included rehabilitation therapy in both groups, found mostly equivalence between steroid
injection and nerve block (Parashar et al., 2021) One trial suggested modest additive benefit
of nerve block to PT (Klç et al., 2015). Nerve blocks are invasive, have adverse effects, and
are of moderate cost; however, a block is recommended for select patients who have
inadequate results with NSAID, exercise, PT and steroid injection.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Suprascapular
Nerve Blocks OR SSNB; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 22 articles in PubMed, 141 in
Scopus, 7 in CINAHL, 21 in Cochrane Library, 841 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 3 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 9 articles
considered for inclusion, 6 randomized trials and 3 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

369

VISCOSUPPLEMENTATION FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
There is no recommendation for viscosupplementation injections for the treatment of
adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no placebo-controlled trials. One comparative trial found equivalence between
one steroid injection and a series of 3 hyaluronate injections (Lim et al., 2014). Another 4arm trial found physical therapy was the best treatment (Calis M, 2006). As there are no
quality data defining efficacy, and one trial suggested one steroid injection was equivalent
to 3 hyaluronate injections, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms:
viscosupplementation, hyaluronic acid, hyaluronan; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 22 articles in
PubMed, 102 in Scopus, 8 in CINAHL, 14 in Cochrane Library, 3530 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 6 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 0 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 8
articles considered for inclusion, 4 randomized trials and 2 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PLATELET RICH PLASMA (PRP) FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
PRP injections are selectively recommended for treatment of adhesive capsulitis
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

370

Indications
Moderate to severe adhesive capsulitis, having insufficient results with exercises, and
steroid injection (generally at least several weeks after a steroid injection which suppresses
the inflammation that the PRP intentionally seeks to produce).
Benefits
Improvement in ROM and reduced pain.
Harms
Increased pain, infection, allergic reaction, blood clots.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A total of three injections given two weeks apart has been used in both placebo-controlled
trials (Ünlü et al., 2021) (Lin, 2018).
Indications for discontinuation
Severe adverse effect, allergic reaction, intolerance.
Rationale
There are multiple RCTS involving PRP injections. Two modest-sized trials suggest
superiority of PRP to placebo (Ünlü et al., 2021) (Lin, 2018). However, a comparative trial
found no superiority to physical therapy (Thu et al., 2020). PRP injections have not worked
well for many disorders, raising concerns about this relatively sparse literature base. With
two trials suggesting some efficacy, PRP injections are selectively recommended for use in
patients who have inadequate results with exercises, therapy and steroid injection.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Platelet-rich
Plasma Injections OR PRP; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 15 articles in PubMed, 48 in
Scopus, 5 in CINAHL, 19 in Cochrane Library, 1,140 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 2 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 2 articles
considered for inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

371

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
HYDRODILATATION FOR TREATMENT OF ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS IN SELECT PATIENTS
Recommended
Hydrodilatation is selectively recommended for treatment of adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Adhesive capsulitis, especially moderate to severely affected patients with pain and loss of
motion. Should be reserved for patients who do not respond sufficiently to NSAIDs,
exercises, and steroid injection(s) (Loew et al., 2005).
Benefits
Potential to improve the adhesive capsulitis.
Harms
Rare infection, increased pain, failure to improve the adhesive capsulitis.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
If there is no improvement after one procedure, a second would not be recommended. If
there objectively improved range of motion with one procedure but an incomplete
response, a second may be selectively indicated to attempt to achieve a complete
resolution.
Rationale
Hydrodilatation has been evaluated in multiple moderate-quality trials, with and without
arthrography, usually accompanied by steroid instillation. Results of these studies conflict.
One moderate-quality trial suggests hydrodilatation was ineffective compared with a sham
(Bennell et al., 2007), and has been interpreted as corroborative evidence that the natural
course is towards resolution. A moderate-quality trial found distension superior to
glucocorticosteroid injection (Gam et al., 1998), although another trial found a lack of such
benefit (Paruthikunnan et al., 2020). Another moderate-quality trial suggested arthrographic
distension was superior to physiotherapy alone (Khan et al., 2005). A comparative trial

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

372

suggested arthroscopic release was superior to dilatation (Gallacher S, 2018). On balance,
these studies somewhat conflict, but overall appear to suggest that hydrodilatation may be
effective, if inferior to arthroscopic release (Gallacher S, 2018). Hydrodilatation is invasive,
has adverse effects, and is of moderate to high cost. However, it is recommended for select
patients in whom less invasive treatments, including injections, have failed to provide
sufficient treatment.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Hydrodilatation;
adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 24 articles in PubMed, 238 in Scopus, 11 in CINAHL, 30 in Cochrane
Library, 608 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 6
from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 911 articles considered for inclusion, 6
randomized trials and 2 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Arthroscopy for diagnostic purposes, as well as to release contractures associated with the
disorder and/or manipulation under anesthesia, has been used to evaluate and treat
patients with adhesive capsulitis. Arthroscopy has also been combined with hydrodilatation.
Open release of contractures also has been used to treat patients with adhesive capsulitis.
ARTHROSCOPIC SURGERY FOR ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Arthroscopy is recommended for evaluation of select patients with adhesive capsulitis,
including subsequent, definitive operative approaches.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Adhesive capsulitis in severely affected patients with pain and loss of motion who do not
respond sufficiently to NSAIDs, exercise, injection(s), and potentially to hydrodilatation or

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

373

MUA and in whom there is believed to be a remediable, intra-articular or periarticular
defect that is able to be addressed surgically (Wiley, 1991) (Ogilvie-Harris et al., 1995)
(Andersen et al., 1998) (Loew et al., 2005) (Pollock et al., 1994) (Uitvlugt et al., 1993)
(Andersen et al., 1996), including:
●
rotator cuff tear with surgical indications and the expectation that surgical treatment
will immediately follow arthroscopy (see below);
●
labral tear with surgical indications (see below);
●
impingement syndrome with surgical indications (see below);
●
glenohumeral instability,
●
recurrent dislocations,
●
other moderate or severe shoulder joint pain, or
●
acromioclavicular arthritis.
Benefits
Diagnostic confirmation and the opportunity for definitive treatment.
Harms
Infections, operative complications.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Arthroscopy would rarely be repeated other than for new indications.
Rationale
There are no sham-controlled trials. However, two trials suggest superiority of arthroscopic
surgical release compared with glucocorticoid injection (Qi Zhu, 2019) (Mukherjee et al.,
2017). Arthroscopy also has particular advantages to address co-exiting and potentially
contributing conditions (e.g., rotator cuff tear, labral tear). Arthroscopy is invasive, has
adverse effects and is high cost. However, in select patients there may be no other option
for addressing adhesive capsulitis particularly if a patient is not responding to non-operative
and minimally invasive care. Thus, arthroscopy is selectively recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Arthroscopic
Surgery, Arthroscopy; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder; controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 230 articles in PubMed, 2545 in
Scopus, 73 in CINAHL, 85 in Cochrane Library, 8850 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 16 from PubMed, 13 from Scopus, 2 from CINAHL, 3
from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 33 articles

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

374

considered for inclusion, 4 randomized trials and 4 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
OPEN RELEASE OF CONTRACTURES FOR SELECT PATIENTS WITH ADHESIVE CAPSULITIS
Recommended
Open release surgery is selectively recommended for patients with adhesive capsulitis.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Adhesive capsulitis, especially severely affected patients with pain and limited range of
motion who do not respond sufficiently to NSAIDs, injection(s), exercise, hydrodilatation,
manipulation under anesthesia and generally only if there is another coexistent disorder
that is felt to require open surgical procedure(s) to resolve (Loew et al., 2005).
Benefits
Potential to improve the range of motion and other limitations associated with adhesive
capsulitis.
Harms
Further medicalize and failure to realize material improvements.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
If there is no success with one surgical approach, there would generally be no indication to
repeat the procedure(s).
Rationale
There are no quality trials of open release of contractures from adhesive capsulitis. Open
surgical procedures are invasive, have adverse effects, and are highly costly. They may be
indicated for highly select use, mostly for those believed to have a defined, resolvable
process that can be addressed through an open procedure (e.g., rotator cuff tear). Thus,
they are indicated for select purposes.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

375

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Open Release of
Contractures OR Open surgical release of contractures; adhesive capsulitis, frozen shoulder;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 3 articles in
PubMed, 10 in Scopus, 10 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane Library, 3000 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 0 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 3
articles considered for inclusion, 0 randomized trials and 3 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

FOLLOW-UP VISITS
Patients with adhesive capsulitis often require many follow-up appointments, particularly if
they are undergoing active treatments, need assistance with advancing a course of
exercises, and/or require significant work limitations that need frequent adjustments.
Frequencies of appointments may also be greater when more workplace limitations are
required, and job demands are greater. In the few patients who undergo surgical
procedures, post-operative rehabilitation can be considerable, particularly in older patients
with other associated injuries such as rotator cuff injuries. In those cases, the patient may
require therapy on a prolonged basis including to manage/ progress the home exercise
program and patient reassurance/ education in order to recover as much function as
possible.

THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The following section contains recommendations for evaluating and managing thoracic
outlet syndrome from the Evidence-Based Shoulder Disorders Panel. These
recommendations are based on critically appraised higher-quality research evidence or,
when such evidence was unavailable or inconsistent, on expert consensus as required in
ACOEM’s Methodology. Recommendations are made under the following categories:
●
●
●
●

Strongly Recommended, “A” Level
Moderately Recommended, “B” Level
Recommended, “C” Level
Insufficient – Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

376

●
●
●
●
●

Insufficient – No Recommendation (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – Not Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Not Recommended, “C” Level
Moderately Not Recommended, “B” Level
Strongly Not Recommended, “A” Level

OVERVIEW
Thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) is one of the most controversial entrapment syndromes (475477,1691-1698)
with some experts questioning its existence, particularly the “disputed” form of
TOS (476,1692,1699-1701).
Thoracic outlet syndrome involves compression of the neurological or vascular structures
connecting the arm to the torso due to any cause (1691). Syndrome labels that have been
used and causes include cervical rib syndrome, costoclavicular syndrome, first thoracic rib
syndrome, scalenus anticus syndrome, hyperabduction syndrome, cervicobrachial
neurovascular compression syndrome, shoulder-arm syndrome, hyperextensionhyperflexion cervical injury, brachial plexus adhesions, clavicular fracture malunion, effort
vein thrombosis syndrome, macromastia, pneumatic hammer syndrome, brachial plexus
syndrome, Adson’s syndrome, Paget-Schroetter syndrome, shoulder-girdle syndrome,
fractured clavicle syndrome, cervical brachial compression syndrome, pectoralis minor
syndrome, humeral head syndrome, and Rucksack (backpack) paralysis
(476,1702,1703,1704,1705,1706)
. The most common cause is believed to be congenital (1695).
There are 3 broad anatomic locations for compression: 1) scalene triangle; 2) costoclavicular
triangle; and 3) the subcoracoid space . The scalene triangle is mostly muscular along with
the first thoracic rib and transmits the nerve trunks between the scalenus muscles as well as
the subclavian vein and artery near the first rib. The costoclavicular triangle is formed by the
first rib, clavicle, subclavius muscle, upper border of the scapula, and subscapularis muscle.
The subcoracoid space is beneath the coracoid process and is closely related to the
clavipectoral fascia and costocoracoid ligament. Patients are often thought to have multiple
abnormalities (1707), which adds to confusion and controversies.
Generally, when an anatomic cause of neurovascular compression includes unequivocal
objective evidence of sequelae of compression, the syndrome is not controversial
(477,479,1699,1708)
. The vast majority of cases include vague symptoms without a clearly
identifiable source of compression (e.g., cervical rib); thus, those cases are often
controversial (476,477). Additional evidence from cadaver studies suggests only approximately
10% of people have bilaterally normal anatomy with most individuals having anomalous
bands in the thoracic outlet, raising concerns about the implications of congenital bands
identified in the context of a diagnosis of TOS (1694,1709). While there are different
classification schemes (1701), there are at five generally recognized TOSs (1699,1700,1710):
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Arterial
Venous
Traumatic neurovascular
True neurogenic
Disputed

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

377

Another classification system recognizes three TOSs: (i) compression of the brachial plexus
(aka, Neurogenic TOS); (ii) compression of the subclavian vein or artery (aka, Vascular TOS);
and (iii) non-specific or Disputed TOS (aka, Symptomatic TOS) (476,479,1692).
Either venous or arterial TOS are thought to be relatively rare, affecting approximately 5% of
cases (1695,1701,1711-1716), and rarely involving thrombosis (1717,1718). The majority of TOS cases
are believed to have neurological symptoms and are disputed (477,1711). Only 1 to 3% of cases
are believed to have true neurogenic TOS in a C8/T1 distribution (477,1719). Adding to the
confusion is the diversity of symptoms that purportedly may include facial pain, visual
disturbances, tachycardia, dyspnea, dysphagias, vertigo, tinnitus, and sleep disturbances
(1695,1720-1722)
. Many of these symptoms are also characteristic of anxiety disorders.
There are no quality epidemiological studies linking this disorder to work (475,1723). The most
commonly reported cause is congenital. It has been speculated there may be occupational
physical factors associated with TOS (1724). Also, there is no consistent pattern of work tasks
that has been postulated as risk factors as both heavy work and sedentary work have been
proposed (1724). Similarly, overhead work is another purported factor for which quality
evidence is lacking.
Although there are few quality trials for treatment (1725,1726), TOS is included in the ACOEM
Shoulder Disorders Guideline for informational purposes because there are patients
affected with this condition who require evaluation and consideration of treatment. Nonoperative treatment has been implemented for initial patient management. Surgery has
been occasionally utilized for those who fail non-operative treatment (476).
Symptoms in vascular TOS cases include reduced pulse, ischemia, venous engorgement, and
edema that may vary depending on the degree of arterial and/or venous narrowing
(476,1692,1693,1708)
. Symptoms in many cases of neurogenic TOS include shoulder and neck pain,
pain radiating into the upper extremity, muscle weakness in the upper extremity, and loss of
sensation in the distribution of the affected neurological structure(s). Poorly defined, nonspecific symptoms contribute to the controversial nature of, and difficulty diagnosing,
disputed TOS (477,1727). The differential diagnosis of neurogenic TOS as well as disputed TOS is
thought to prominently include cervical radiculopathy, cervical spondylosis, carpal tunnel
syndrome, pronator syndrome, radial nerve entrapments, ulnar neuropathies, fibromyalgia,
multiple sclerosis, vasculitis, and Horner’s syndrome (479,1692,1701,1727,1728).

DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
Consensus diagnostic criteria for TOS have been published (1699,1700,1710,1729-1731).
According to (1730), neurogenic TOS should be defined by the presence of three of the
following four criteria:
"1. LOCAL FINDINGS
a. History: Symptoms consistent with irritation or inflammation at the site of
compression—scalene triangle in the case of NTOS and pectoralis insertion
site in the case of NPMS—along with symptoms due to referred pain in the
areas near the thoracic outlet. Patients may complain of pain in the chest
wall, axilla, upper back, shoulder, trapezius region, neck, or head (including
headache).
b. Examination: Pain on palpation of the affected area as above
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

378

2. PERIPHERAL FINDINGS
a. History: Arm or hand symptoms consistent with central nerve
compression. Such symptoms can include numbness, pain, paresthesias,
vasomotor changes, and weakness (with muscle wasting in extreme cases).
i. These peripheral symptoms are often exacerbated by maneuvers that
either narrow the thoracic outlet (lifting the arms overhead) or stretch the
brachial plexus (dangling; often driving or walking/running).
b. Examination: Palpation of the affected area (scalene triangle or pectoralis
minor insertion site) often reproduces the peripheral symptoms.
i. Peripheral symptoms are often produced or worsened by provocative
maneuvers that are believed to narrow the scalene triangle (EAST) or to
stretch the brachial plexus (ULTT) (both described later).
3. ABSENCE of other reasonably likely diagnoses (cervical disk disease, shoulder
disease, carpal tunnel syndrome, chronic regional pain syndrome, brachial neuritis)
that might explain the majority of symptoms
4. In those who undergo it, the response to a properly performed TEST INJECTION is
positive. ” (1730)
According to (1730), venous TOS should be defined by the presence of all three of the
following critieria:
1. HISTORY
a. Arm swelling, usually with discoloration and heaviness
i. This can occur with the arms overhead only, suggesting nonthrombotic
VTOS, or present as a fixed symptom, suggesting subclavian vein thrombosis.
b. Absence of inciting cause (indwelling catheter, malignant neoplasm)
2. EXAMINATION
a. Visible arm swelling at rest, although if the arm swelling is reported only
with exertion or arms overhead, the arm may be normal at rest.
b. Arm discoloration
c. Shoulder, upper arm, or chest wall venous collaterals
3. IMAGING
a. Documentation of venous compression at the costoclavicular junction by
ultrasound, venography, or cross-sectional imaging:
i. If the vein is occluded from mid upper arm to the innominate in the setting
of appropriate symptoms (and no secondary cause is present), VTOS may be
assumed to be present.
ii. If the vein is patent but abnormal, the location of the abnormality
(costoclavicular junction or pectoralis minor space) should be documented.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

379

iii. If the vein appears normal at rest, results of ultrasound or venography
with the arm abducted >90 degrees should be reported.
iv. In all cases, every attempt should be made to obtain venography through
the brachial or basilic veins rather than the cephalic vein as disease
sometimes extends lateral to the cephalic arch. ” (1730)
According to (1730), “ATOS is defined as an objective abnormality of the subclavian artery
caused by extrinsic compression and subsequent damage by an anomalous first rib or
analogous abnormal structure (cervical rib or band) at the base of the scalene triangle. Such
an abnormality can be symptomatic (ischemia or embolization) or asymptomatic (aneurysm,
occlusion, or silent embolization). Loss of pulses or discoloration with provocative
maneuvers in patients with NTOS does not mean that ATOS is present; documented injury
to the subclavian artery or symptomatic arm ischemia with arms elevated must be present
for this diagnosis to be made. ”

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
There are no quality studies of diagnostic tests for any of the types of TOS; thus, an
evidence-based workup protocol is not available. Specific tests are recommended to focus
on the type of TOS thought to be present. For all types of TOS, x-rays are recommended. Xrays may be needed of the shoulders, neck, chest and/or thoracic spine (1725). Other studies
may be helpful, including MRI with contrast and CT (1725). MRI with provocative maneuvers
has been reported to improve the value of the MRI (1732). Electrodiagnostic studies are also
recommended, particularly to attempt to seek objective evidence of neurological
impingement.
For vascular TOS cases, diagnostic test considerations may include duplex scanning, Doppler
ultrasonography, venography, venous pressure measurements (1714), arteriograms (178),
coagulation studies, chest radiography, spiral CT, MRI, and ventilation / perfusion nuclear
scanning. Additional studies may be required to evaluate other potential disorders in the
differential, such as neoplasia.

ANTIBODIES
In the absence of quality evidence, it is recommended that the diagnosis of thoracic outlet
syndrome be managed according to the recommendations for Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy.
See Antibodies to Confirm Specific Disorders [Recommended, Evidence (C)].

NONSPECIFIC INFLAMMATORY MARKERS
In the absence of quality evidence, it is recommended that the diagnosis of thoracic outlet
syndrome be managed according to the recommendations for Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy.
See Non-specific Inflammatory Markers for Screening for Inflammatory Disorders in
Subacute or Chronic Shoulder Pain [Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)].

CYTOKINES
In the absence of quality evidence, it is recommended that the diagnosis of thoracic outlet
syndrome be managed according to the recommendations for rotator cuff tendinopathy.
See Cytokine Testing for Chronic Shoulder Pain [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence
(I)].

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

380

X-RAYS
X-rays show bony structure, are the initial test for evaluation of most cases of shoulder pain,
including thoracic outlet syndrome (50,610), and have been utilized in the diagnosis of thoracic
outlet syndrome (1727,1733).
X-RAYS FOR THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
Recommended
X-rays are recommended for evaluation of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Most patients with symptoms thought to be due to thoracic outlet syndrome are generally
recommended to have x-rays obtained. X-rays may include the shoulder, cervical spine,
thoracic spine, and chest.
Benefits
Diagnosis of a fracture, calcific tendinitis, or otherwise latent medical condition(s).
Harms
Medicalization or worsening of an otherwise benign shoulder condition, minor radiation
exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining x-rays once is generally sufficient with two to three views per body part. There is
some evidence that the x-ray technique/positioning is important (Cho et al., 2012). For
patients with chronic symptoms thought to be due to TOS, it may be reasonable to obtain a
second set of x-rays later to re-evaluate the patient’s condition, particularly if symptoms
change.
Rationale
Quality studies are sparse, with one study suggesting the positioning is important to show
numbers of ribs more clearly (Cho et al., 2012). X-rays may be helpful to evaluate patients
thought to have TOS, both to diagnose and to assist with the differential diagnostic
possibilities such as tendinoses and arthroses. X-rays are particularly helpful for diagnosis of
cervical ribs, cervical spine disorders, calcific tendinitis, etc., which results in different
optimal treatment approaches. X-rays are non-invasive, low to moderately costly, and have
little risk of adverse effects, and therefore are recommended.
Evidence
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

381

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Radiography, XRays, Roentgenograms; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression Syndrome,
shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative
predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and efficiency. We found and reviewed
577 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed
using Best Match tab to find and review 577 articles, 909 in Scopus, 1 in CINAHL, 0 in
Cochrane Library, 16000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 1 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 2 articles considered for inclusion, 1
diagnostic study and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Computerized tomography (CT) has been utilized in the diagnosis of thoracic outlet
syndrome (1734-1738).
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (CT) FOR EVALUATION OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
Sometimes Recommended
Computed tomography (CT) is selectively recommended for patients suspected of having
thoracic outlet syndrome.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Patients thought to have thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS). CT is particularly advantageous
over MRI for concerns regarding osseous abnormalities and among those with
contraindications for MRI (e.g., ferrous implants or foreign bodies); otherwise, MRI is
thought to be superior.
Benefits
Define anatomy and potentially secure a diagnosis for the cause of the symptoms.
Harms

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

382

False positives and false negatives for rotator cuff tears.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Indications for discontinuation
There are quality studies of the use of CT for evaluation of TOS, showing that CT was
superior to x-rays for evaluating transverse process anomalies and cervical ribs (Bilbey et al.,
1989). CT was shown helpful in another study that included extremity positioning (RemyJardin et al., 2000). CT angiography was also shown to be helpful for vascular TOS cases
(Gillet et al., 2018). Thus, CT is selectively recommended for evaluation of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Computerized
Tomography, CT scans, Tomography, X-Ray Computed; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic
Outlet Compression Syndrome, shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity,
positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and
efficiency. We found and reviewed 123 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we
did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 123 articles, 106
in Scopus, 5 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 10300 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 6 articles
considered for inclusion, 6 diagnostic studies and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

LOCAL ANESTHETIC INJECTIONS
Local anesthetic injections and nerve blocks have potential to confirm a clinical impression.
Criteria for blocks are increasingly converging on the criterion of at least an 80% reduction in
symptoms that is concordant with the expected duration of the anesthetic. Diagnostic
injections are also performed via the subacromial space, glenohumeral joint, and
acromioclavicular joint. See Injection Therapies.
In the absence of quality evidence, it is recommended that the use of local anesthetic
injections for thoracic outlet syndrome be managed according to the recommendations for
neuropathic pain in the ACOEM Chronic Pain guideline. See Local Anesthetic Injections for
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

383

Diagnosing Chronic Neuropathic Pain [Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)] and Nerve
Blocks for Neuropathic Pain [Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)] in the ACOEM Chronic
Pain guideline.

ELECTROMYOGRAPHY
Electrodiagnostic studies have also been used to confirm diagnostic impressions of other
peripheral nerve entrapments, brachial plexopathies, and neurologic component of thoracic
outlet syndrome (630,631,1739,1740).
See the Cervical and Thoracic Spine Disorders and Hand, Wrist, and Forearm Disorders for
discussions regarding use of electrodiagnostic studies for evaluation of cervical spine and
distal upper extremity-related disorders that may present as shoulder pain, including TOS.
ELECTROMYOGRAPHY FOR THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
Recommended
Electrodiagnostic studies are recommended to assist in the diagnosis of subacute or thoracic
outlet syndrome.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Patients with subacute or chronic paresthesias with or without pain, particularly with
unclear diagnosis and/or thought to potentially have thoracic outlet syndrome. EMG may be
used to rule out other disorders. Failure to resolve or plateau of suspected radicular pain
after waiting 4 to 6 weeks (to provide for sufficient time to potentially develop EMG
abnormalities as well as time for conservative treatment to resolve the problems), equivocal
imaging findings, and suspicion by history and physical examination that a neurologic
condition other than radiculopathy may be present.
Benefits
Identification of neurological impingement/entrapment, neurological disorders, including
radiculopathy, plexopathy and peripheral nerve entrapment
Harms
Negligible
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally, only one test is needed. If the test is obtained too early, a repeat study may be
needed if symptoms persist or progress to ascertain whether the test becomes abnormal
with time.
Rationale
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

384

There is one small study without unaffected controls that suggesting lack of efficacy of EMG
studies for the evaluation of TOS (Passero et al., 1994), but no other quality studies (Vanti et
al., 2007, Tolson, 2004, Tsao et al., 2014). Yet, electrodiagnostic studies appear to be
capable of assisting in confirming peripheral nerve entrapments such as thoracic outlet
syndrome, the long thoracic nerve and suprascapular nerve. These studies are minimally
invasive, have minimal potential for adverse effects, and are of moderate to high cost
depending on the extent of the testing required. Prior to considering surgery, they are
recommended as the outcomes in workers’ compensation patients are reportedly poor
(Franklin et al., 2000, Franklin, 2013, Washington State Department of Labor and Industries,
2010).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms:
Electromyography, EMG; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression
Syndrome, shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value,
negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and efficiency. We found and
reviewed 800 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 800 articles, 774 in Scopus, 2 in CINAHL, 2
in Cochrane Library, 4,870 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 2 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 2 articles considered for inclusion, 1
diagnostic study and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

FUNCTIONAL CAPACITY EVALUATIONS
In the absence of quality evidence, it is recommended that the diagnosis of thoracic outlet
syndrome be managed according to the recommendations for Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy.
See Functional Capacity Evaluations for Chronic Disabling Shoulder Pain [Recommended,
Insufficient Evidence (I)].

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been utilized in the diagnosis of thoracic outlet
syndrome (1741-1749).
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (MRI) FOR THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

385

MRI is recommended for patients suspected of having thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Patients thought to have thoracic outlet syndrome.
Benefits
Define anatomy and potentially secure a diagnosis for the cause of the symptoms.
Harms
False positives and false negatives for rotator cuff tears.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
Multiple trials found utility of MRI for both vascular and nervous TOS (Panegyres et al.,
1993, Demondion et al., 2003, Ersoy et al., 2012), including MRA (Zhang et al., 2019). One
trial found MRI had low sensitivity but high specificity (Hardy et al., 2019), one found high
sensitivity and high specificity (while another found both low sensitivity and low specificity
(Singh et al., 2014). One study suggested that extremity positioning was important (Smedby
et al., 2000). Thus, MRI has reasonably consistent evidence of utility of MRI in the
assessment of TOS patients and is recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Magnetic
Resonance Imaging, MRI; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression
Syndrome, shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value,
negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and efficiency. We found and
reviewed 142 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 142 articles, 828 in Scopus, 9 in CINAHL, 1
in Cochrane Library, 8500 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 9 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 9 articles considered for inclusion, 9
diagnostic studies and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

386

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ULTRASOUND
Ultrasound has been used for the diagnosis of thoracic outlet syndrome (1750-1764).
ULTRASOUND FOR THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
Sometimes Recommended
Doppler ultrasound is recommended to address vascular thoracic outlet syndrome.
Otherwise, there is no recommendation for ultrasound as a diagnostic procedure in thoracic
outlet syndrome. There are other indications for ultrasound.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
One study suggested US was able to identify fibromuscular bands (Arányi et al., 2016). One
study suggested US was insufficiently precise for the evaluation of subclavian vein
thrombosis (Brownie et al., 2020), although another thought there was sufficient accuracy
for use regarding thromboses (Longley et al., 1992). Another study suggested insufficient
operant characterizes for the use of US for arterial TOS (Bishop et al., 2021). A study
suggested insufficient utility of US for neurogenic TOS (Fouasson-Chailloux et al., 2021).
Doppler US is helpful to address vascular TOS and thus is recommended for that indication.
Otherwise, because the studies of US conflict, there is no recommendation. There are other
indications for ultrasound.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Ultrasound,
Ultrasonography; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression Syndrome,
shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative
predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and efficiency. We found and reviewed
565 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed
using Best Match tab to find and review 565 articles,700 in Scopus, 4 in CINAHL, 1 in
Cochrane Library, 12800 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 3 from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 11 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 16 articles considered for inclusion, 9
diagnostic studies and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

387

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SINGLE PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT)
SINGLE-PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT) FOR THORACIC OUTLET
SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for single-proton emission computed tomography (SPECT) for
the evaluation of patients with thoracic outlet syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of thoracic outlet syndrome. Thus, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Single Photon
Emission Computerized Tomography, Positron Emission tomography; Thoracic Outlet
Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression Syndrome, shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic,
sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value
of tests, efficacy, and efficiency. We found and reviewed 6014 articles in PubMed using
Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find
and review 6008 articles, 679 in Scopus, 1 in CINAHL, 13 in Cochrane Library, 317 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 0 articles considered for inclusion, 0 diagnostic studies and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

388

POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET)
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET) FOR THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation regarding positron emission tomography (PET) scanning for
the evaluation of patients with thoracic outlet syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of thoracic outlet syndrome; thus, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Single Photon
Emission Computerized Tomography, Positron Emission tomography; Thoracic Outlet
Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression Syndrome, shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic,
sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value
of tests, efficacy, and efficiency. We found and reviewed 6014 articles in PubMed using
Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find
and review 6008 articles, 679 in Scopus, 1 in CINAHL, 13 in Cochrane Library, 317 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 0 articles considered for inclusion, 0 diagnostic studies and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
INITIAL CARE
Initial care of TOS is based on the exact type of compression. For acute venous TOS with
potential thrombus, evaluation and confirmation of the thrombus is urgent. Treatment is
based on confirmation of thrombus; otherwise there usually are no urgent care
requirements. For arterial TOS cases, evaluation and urgent management may be required
depending on the severity of the compression and vascular impairment. Disputed TOS cases
require evaluation of disparate conditions in the differential diagnosis. Initial care for
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

389

suspected neurogenic or disputed TOS may include symptomatic management with overthe-counter analgesics, self-applications of heat and ice.
OVER-THE-COUNTER ANALGESICS FOR THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for over-the-counter (OTC) analgesics for thoracic outlet
syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies of OTC analgesics and thus there is no recommendation.
However, self-use of these medications that have very low hazard potential may be
reasonable.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: OTC Analgesics,
Over the Counter Analgesics, Acetaminophen, NSAIDS; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic
Outlet Compression Syndrome, controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 111 articles in PubMed, 5 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 4040 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles fit the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SELF-APPLICATION OF HEAT FOR THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for self-application of heat for thoracic outlet syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

390

There are no quality trials using heat or cryotherapies and thus there are no
recommendations.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Self-Application of
Heat and Ice, Heat-Cold Application; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet
Compression Syndrome, shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive
predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and efficiency.
We found and reviewed 111 articles in PubMed, 17 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 353 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. We considered for inclusion 0 from
PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SELF-APPLICATION OF ICE FOR THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for self-application of ice for thoracic outlet syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials using heat or cryotherapies and thus there are no
recommendations.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Self-Application of
Heat and Ice, Heat-Cold Application; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet
Compression Syndrome, shoulder; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive
predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and efficiency.
We found and reviewed 111 articles in PubMed, 17 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 353 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. We considered for inclusion 0 from

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

391

PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ACTIVITY MODIFICATION AND EXERCISE
Exercise (1691,1701,1724,1725,1765-1772) and education (1766,1769,1770,1773-1777) are recommended.
Exercise has often been prescribed (1725,1765-1768). However, the diversity of exercise regimens
with highly variable approaches underscores the lack of directed quality evidence. Some
emphasize strengthening of the shoulder girdle (1691,1701,1725), with most patients reporting
improvement in their symptoms (1691,1768). Studies recommend rehabilitation that includes
postural training (1724,1766,1769,1770,1778); exercises emphasizing stretching (1771); massage
traction and isometric exercises (1779); massage and acupuncture (1780); and exercises
emphasizing postural physiotherapy, including diaphragmatic breathing (1772). Evidence of
efficacy is poor, and it has been suspected many patients naturally improve over time (1701).
Thus, there is no recommendation for any particular exercise regimen over another.
Home exercise programs have been utilized with 88% satisfaction at 2 years in a large
longitudinal case series (1765) and are recommended. Weight loss has been used as a
treatment (1724,1766,1769,1773) and is recommended, particularly among patients with obesity.
Psychological distress has been reportedly elevated in these patients with a suggestion for
psychological care, relaxation, and endurance training (1781), which are recommended for
select patients.
In the absence of quality evidence, it is recommended that neurogenic TOS and disputed
TOS be treated as neuropathic pain and managed according to the recommendations in the
ACOEM Chronic Pain Guideline. See Aerobic Exercise for Neuropathic Pain [Recommended,
Insufficient Evidence (I)], Strengthening Exercise for Neuropathic Pain [Recommended,
Insufficient Evidence (I)], and Aquatic Therapy for Neuropathic Pain [Recommended,
Insufficient Evidence (I)].
EXERCISE FOR THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
Recommended
Exercise is recommended for thoracic outlet syndrome.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
All patients with TOS are candidates for treatment with exercises. This often requires
progressive exercises under supervision of a therapist.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

392

Benefits
Improved or resolved symptoms.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Different regimens may be used. Often this includes appointments 1-2 times per week for
the first few weeks and then weekly appointments for several additional weeks. Additional
sets of appointments should be based on continued progressive improvements in symptoms
and function while not yet achieving full recovery.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution, intolerance, non-compliance.
Rationale
There is one trial that used stretching exercises in all groups, while using injection in one
group suggesting superiority of injection (Kim et al., 2016). There are no quality trials of
exercise for treatment of TOS. However, exercise appears effective for some patients
(Watson et al., 2009, Povlsen et al., 2010, Hanif et al., 2007, Collins et al., 2021, Kuhn et al.,
2013). Exercise is not invasive, has low adverse effects, is low to moderate in cost, and
appears to have some efficacy; thus, exercise for TOS is recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Exercise, Exercise
Therapy, Resistance Training; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression
Syndrome, controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly,
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed
113 articles in PubMed, 492 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 23 in Cochrane Library, 14,700 in Google
Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane Library, 2 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other
sources. Of the 5 articles considered for inclusion, 0 randomized trials and 1 systematic
review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

393

we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
WEIGHT LOSS FOR THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
Recommended
Weight loss is recommended for thoracic outlet syndrome, particularly among patients with
obesity.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Weight loss has been used as a treatment for thoracic outlet syndrome (Parziale et al., 2000,
Crosby et al., 2004, Leffert, 1991, Novak et al., 1995) and thus is recommended, particularly
among patients with obesity.
PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS (RELAXATION AND ENDURANCE TRAINING) FOR
THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
Recommended
Psychological care, including relaxation and endurance training, is recommended for select
patients with psychological distress.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Psychological distress has been reportedly elevated in the patients with thoracic outlet
syndrome. Psychological care, including relaxation and endurance training, has been
suggested (Gockel et al., 1995); thus, they are recommended for select patients.
PHYSICAL THERAPY FOR THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for physical therapy for thoracic outlet syndrome. However,
exercise is recommended, and it may need to be supervised by a therapist (see Exercise for
Thoracic Outlet Syndrome).
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

394

Exercises are recommended for TOS and commonly require supervision; however, there is
no recommendation for a specific discipline.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Physical Therapy,
Physiotherapy, Physical Therapy Modalities; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet
Compression Syndrome, controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 119 articles in PubMed, 251 in Scopus, 8 in CINAHL, 4 in Cochrane
Library, 18000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 2
from PubMed, 1 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 4 articles considered for inclusion, 0 randomized
trials and 1 systematic review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MEDICATIONS
Arterial TOS treatment is thought to generally require surgery to address a structural defect
(479,1692,1782,1783)
. Medications are generally not indicated as a primary initial focus, although
some use of thrombolytics and anticoagulation may be required acutely.
Acute venous TOS with documented thrombosis is often treated by anticoagulation (1784-1793)
and may involve fibrinolytics depending on severity of the condition and perceived risks
(1787,1791,1792,1794-1804)
. Thrombectomy (1714,1785,1805,1806) and venoplasty (1794) are options for
treatment of moderate to severe clots.
True neurological TOS is thought to be largely associated with anatomic defects (479).
However, authors have required a trial of non-operative care and reserved surgical
treatment for those with advancing neurological symptoms or signs (479,1807,1808,1809,1810). For
disputed TOS, the existence of the condition, evaluation, and treatment are controversial
(477)
. Non-operative treatments are generally the first interventions attempted (1765,1811).
Specific recommendations have included NSAIDs (1724,1766), muscle relaxants (1724,1766),
biofeedback (1724,1766), and anti-depressants (1724).
In the absence of quality evidence, it is recommended that neurogenic TOS and disputed
TOS be treated as neuropathic pain and managed according to the recommendations in the
ACOEM Chronic Pain Guideline. See the following recommendations for neuropathic pain in
the ACOEM Chronic Pain Guideline:
●
●

NSAIDs for Chronic Neuropathic Pain [Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
Acetaminophen for Neuropathic Pain [Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

395

●
Muscle Relaxants for Acute Exacerbations of Neuropathic Pain [Recommended,
Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Tricyclic, Tetracyclic, and Serotonin-Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors Antidepressants for Neuropathic Pain [Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)]
●
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors and Norepinephrine-Dopamine Reuptake
Inhibitors for Neuropathic Pain [Recommended, Evidence (C)]
●
Anticonvulsant Agents for Neuropathic Pain [Moderately Recommended, Evidence
(B)]
●
Capsaicin Patches for Neuropathic Pain [Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)]
●
Topical NSAIDs for Chronic Neuropathic Pain [Recommended, Evidence (C)]
●
Lidocaine Patches for Neuropathic Pain [Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)]
See also the ACOEM Opioids Use guideline for recommendation on the Treatment of
Subacute or Chronic Severe Pain [Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)].

DEVICES
Use of orthoses have been reported (1812), but there are no quality trials evaluating their use.
The general tendency is for the condition to improve; thus, it is unclear whether the orthosis
improves the condition beyond what would otherwise occur and there is no plausible
mechanism for orthoses to improve TOS.
TAPING FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
Not Recommended
Taping is not recommended for the treatment of TOS.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence of efficacy for TOS. The sole trial appears to have suffered from
a randomization failure with marked differences in outcome measures at baseline between
the two groups (Ortaç et al., 2020). There is evidence suggesting inefficacy for other
shoulder disorders, and thus these treatments are not recommended for treatment of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Taping, Taping
and Strapping, Athletic Tape; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression
Syndrome, controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly,
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 1
article in PubMed, 9 in Scopus, 1 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 2530 in Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

396

the 1 article considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic review met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MAGNETS FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
Not Recommended
Magnets are not recommended for the treatment of TOS.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence of efficacy for TOS. There is evidence suggesting inefficacy for
other shoulder disorders, and thus these treatments are not recommended for treatment of
TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Magnets,
Magnetic Therapy; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression Syndrome,
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic,
systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0 articles in
PubMed, 6 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 15000 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero
articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

397

ALLIED HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
Acupuncture and other physical methods such as massage, diathermy, and magnets have
been used to treat shoulder pain that includes TOS.
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN FROM THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
Acupuncture is neither recommended nor not recommended to control chronic pain
associated with thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS)
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no trials for TOS; thus, acupuncture is neither recommended nor not
recommended for treatment of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Acupuncture;
Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression Syndrome, controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 0 articles in PubMed, 41 in
Scopus, 18 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 2000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
DIATHERMY FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of diathermy for the treatment of TOS.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

398

Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of diathermy
for treatment of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Diathermy;
Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression Syndrome, controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 11 articles in PubMed, 1687 in
Scopus, in 0 CINAHL, 30 in Cochrane Library, 739 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
INFRARED THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of infrared therapy for the treatment of
TOS.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of infrared
therapy for treatment of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Infrared Therapy;
Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression Syndrome, controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

399

retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 112 articles in PubMed, 773 in
Scopus, 27 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 6600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ULTRASOUND FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of ultrasound for the treatment of TOS.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of ultrasound
for treatment of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Ultrasonography,
Ultrasonic therapy, Therapeutic Ultrasound; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet
Compression Syndrome, controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 129 articles in PubMed, 303 in Scopus, 3 in CINAHL, 6 in Cochrane
Library, 5820 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 5
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 5 articles considered for inclusion, 2 randomized
trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

400

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
LASER THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of laser therapy for the treatment of
TOS.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of laser
therapy for treatment of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Laser Therapy,
LLLT, Low Level Laser Therapy; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression
Syndrome, controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly,
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed
111 articles in PubMed, 12 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 7990 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANUAL THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of manual therapy for the treatment of
TOS.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

401

There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of manual
therapy for treatment of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Manual Therapy,
Manipulative Therapy, Musculoskeletal Manipulations; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic
Outlet Compression Syndrome, controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 112 articles in PubMed, 116 in Scopus, 2 in CINAHL, 6 in Cochrane
Library, 7000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 1 article considered for inclusion, 0 randomized
trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MOBILIZATION FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of mobilization for the treatment of TOS.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
mobilization for treatment of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Mobilization,
Musculoskeletal Manipulation, Manipulation; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet
Compression Syndrome, controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

402

randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 111 articles in PubMed, 620 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane
Library, 10,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANIPULATION FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of manipulation for the treatment of
TOS.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
manipulation for treatment of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Mobilization,
Musculoskeletal Manipulation, Manipulation; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet
Compression Syndrome, controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 111 articles in PubMed, 620 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane
Library, 10,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

403

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MASSAGE FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of massage for the treatment of TOS.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of massage
for treatment of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Massage; Thoracic
Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression Syndrome, controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 111 articles in PubMed, 58 in
Scopus, 10 in CINAHL, 2 in Cochrane Library, 4360 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
HIGH-VOLTAGE GALVANIC STIMULATION FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET
SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of high-voltage galvanic stimulation for
the treatment of TOS.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

404

There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of the highvoltage galvanic stimulation for treatment of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: High Voltage
Galvanic Stimulation, High Voltage Galvanic, High Voltage Pulsed Galvanic Stimulation;
Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression Syndrome, controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 111 articles in PubMed, 5 in
Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 38 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from
Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
H-WAVE® DEVICE STIMULATION FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of H-Wave® Device stimulation for the
treatment of TOS.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of H-Wave®
Device stimulation for treatment of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: H-Wave
Stimulation, H-Wave Device; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression
Syndrome, controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

405

systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed
111 articles in PubMed, 0 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 1 in Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources.
Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
IONTOPHORESIS FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of iontophoresis for the treatment of
TOS.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
iontophoresis for treatment of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Iontophoresis;
Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression Syndrome, controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 11 articles in PubMed, 48 in
Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 471 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0
from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met
the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

406

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MICROCURRENT STIMULATION FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of microcurrent stimulation for the
treatment of TOS.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
microcurrent stimulation for treatment of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Microcurrent;
Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression Syndrome, controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 111 articles in PubMed, 8 in
Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 48 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from
Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PERCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION (PENS) FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC
OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of percutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (PENS) for the treatment of TOS.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

407

Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (PENS) for treatment of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Percutaneous
electrical nerve stimulation (PENS); Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression
Syndrome, controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly,
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed
113 articles in PubMed, 0 in Scopus, 4 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 304 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SYMPATHETIC ELECTROTHERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of sympathetic electrotherapy for the
treatment of TOS.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
sympathetic electrotherapy for treatment of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Sympathetic
Electrotherapy; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression Syndrome,
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

408

systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 111 articles
in PubMed, 1 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane Library, 186 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from
CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero
articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
TRANSCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL STIMULATION (TENS) FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC
OUTLET SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of transcutaneous electrical stimulation
(TENS) for the treatment of TOS.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
transcutaneous electrical stimulation (TENS) for treatment of TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Transcutaneous
Electric Nerve Stimulation, TENS; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression
Syndrome, controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly,
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed
111 articles in PubMed, 0 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 1 in Cochrane Library, 1880 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from
Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

409

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PULSED ELECTROMAGNETIC
FREQUENCY FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
Not Recommended
Pulsed electromagnetic frequency is not recommended for the treatment of TOS.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence of efficacy for TOS. There is evidence suggesting inefficacy for
other shoulder disorders, and thus these treatments are not recommended for treatment of
TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Pulsed
Electromagnetic Frequency; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression
Syndrome, controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly,
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed
112 articles in PubMed, 0 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 199 in Cochrane Library, 6150 in Google
Scholar. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from
Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
INTERFERENTIAL THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
Not Recommended
There is no quality evidence of efficacy for TOS. There is evidence suggesting inefficacy for
other shoulder disorders, and thus these treatments are not recommended for treatment of
TOS.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

410

Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence of efficacy for TOS. There is evidence suggesting inefficacy for
other shoulder disorders, and thus these treatments are not recommended for treatment of
TOS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Interferential
Therapy, Electrical Stimulation Therapy; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet
Compression Syndrome, controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled
trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 111 articles in PubMed, 19 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 102 in Cochrane
Library, 167 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0
from PubMed, 0 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

INJECTION THERAPIES
Injections have been used to treat thoracic outlet syndrome (1813-1818). Diagnostic injections,
particularly of the subacromial space, glenohumeral joint, and acromioclavicular joint, are
sometimes performed. However, when indicated, they are nearly always performed in
combination with a therapeutic intervention, such as a glucocorticosteroid injection.
Injection with a therapeutic agent is nearly always preferable due to less overall
invasiveness with 1 injection rather than 2, as well as the potential to assess the patient
both immediately post-injection for diagnostic purposes as well as longer term for
therapeutic purposes.
See the Injections for Trigger Points recommendations in this guideline.
See also the following recommendations on injection therapies in the ACOEM Chronic Pain
Guideline:
●
●
●
(I)]

Corticosteroids for Neuropathic Pain [No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
Immunoglobulin for Neuropathic Pain [No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
Ketamine Infusion for Neuropathic Pain [No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

411

●
Lidocaine Infusion for Neuropathic Pain [No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence
(I)]
●
Intravenous Phenytoin for Neuropathic Pain [No Recommendation, Insufficient
Evidence (I)]
●
Intravenous Adenosine for Neuropathic Pain [Not Recommended, Insufficient
Evidence (I)]
●
Monoclonal Antibody Injections for Neuropathic Pain [No Recommendation,
Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Dorsal Ganglion Destruction for Neuropathic Pain [Not Recommended, Insufficient
Evidence (I)]
INJECTIONS FOR THE COMBINED DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET
SYNDROME
Sometimes Recommended
Injections are selectively recommended for the combined diagnosis and treatment of TOS.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Diagnostic uncertainty and/or persistent symptoms with functional impairment. Generally,
an injection would be recommended to be performed for both diagnostic and therapeutic
purposes by including a glucocorticoid in the injectant.
Benefits
Assistance with securing a diagnosis and potential improvement in symptoms and
impairment.
Harms
Potential injury to vascular and nervous structures. Complications of steroid injections
include modestly increased risk of infection, glucose intolerance.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally only one injection. A second injection with steroid may be indicated for treatment
of those who developed significant benefit but among whom symptoms re-developed.
Rationale
There are few quality trials of injections for thoracic outlet syndrome. One small crossover
trial comparing exercise with steroid injection in the scalene muscles suggested efficacy of
the steroid injection (Kim et al., 2016), although there was no long-term follow up. Another
trial suggested ropivacaine injections in the scalene muscles have modest efficacy (Rached

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

412

et al., 2019). One high-quality trial found a lack of efficacy of botulinum injections (Finlayson
et al., 2011). Injections are invasive, have some adverse effects, are moderate to high cost,
have limited evidence of efficacy and thus are selectively recommended particularly with a
combined anesthetic and glucocorticosteroid.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Injections;
Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Compression Syndrome, controlled clinical trial,
controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random
allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review,
retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed 120 articles in PubMed, 431 in
Scopus, 6 in CINAHL, 3 in Cochrane Library, 3 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 3 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from
Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 8 articles
considered for inclusion, 3 randomized trials and 1 systematic review met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Patients with vascular TOS, especially arterial, are thought to have surgical indications.
Additionally, surgery is often considered for patients with venous TOS. Chronic venous
symptoms are typically treated with non-operative treatments including exercises, avoiding
exacerbating symptoms and surgical treatments only if symptoms are sufficiently severe and
non-operative means are unsuccessful. Surgical treatments for intrinsic venous obstruction
include endovenectomy (1790,1791,1819,1820), patch graft, or venous bypass
(1714,1790,1819,1821,1822,1823,1824)
. As mentioned above, thrombectomy and venoplasty are options
for treatment of moderate to severe clots. Surgical treatments for extrinsic compression
include first rib resection (1791,1793,1796-1798,1803,1823,1825-1833), clavulectomy
(1791,1822,1825,1827,1834,1835)
, or costoclavicular ligament and subclavius muscle division
(1714,1822,1827,1833,1836-1838)
.
For neurogenic TOS and, particularly disputed TOS, surgical treatment has been considered
controversial. Prior to considering surgery, treatment should consist of a supervised exercise
and postural program with documented compliance from at least 3 months (1724) and either
a documented failure to improve or insufficient improvements (1768). Impairment of work or
activities of daily living should also be present (1839).
Surgery for neurogenic TOS has most often involved resection of either a cervical rib or the
first thoracic rib via supraclavicular, infraclavicular or transaxillary approaches (476,1840-1848).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

413

Additional operative procedures include neurolysis (476), fasciectomy (476), and scalenectomy
or scalenotomy (1849-1851). The only RCT is of low quality, although it suggests transaxillary rib
resection was superior to supraclavicular neuroplasty of the brachial plexus (1852).
Some studies report excellent or good post-operative results in approximately 80% of
patients (1810,1847,1849,1853). However, post-surgical prognoses of disputed TOS in a workers’
compensation population is reportedly poor (1853,1854) with a population-based study
reporting 60% remaining disabled from work at 1 year after surgery (1696). Similar relatively
poor surgical results have been reported in a pain clinic treating patients who sustained
their injuries in motor vehicle crashes with 47% reporting very good pain relief vs. 20% with
non-operative treatment (1855), as well as a study that found trauma similarly conveyed a
worse prognosis. Surgical complications are high; these procedures are sources of
malpractice exposure (1724). A considerable minority of patients undergoing surgery
redevelop symptoms, estimated at 15 to 30% (1714,1856).
SURGERY FOR TREATMENT OF THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROME
Recommended
Surgery is recommended for treatment of thoracic outlet syndrome.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Clearly identifiable and significantly symptomatic anatomical abnormality, including cervical
ribs and other constrictive anatomic structure(s). Candidates for surgery should also have
functional impairments. A minimum of 3 months of progressive, active exercises should be
prescribed and failed. Arterial TOS generally needs earlier surgical intervention. As
outcomes are considerably worse, surgery for disputed TOS is not recommended. Careful
consideration is required to address the potential need for a second surgery.
Benefits
Improved pain and function
Harms
Lack of improvement or worsening pain, increasing impairment and disability (George et al.,
2021)
Frequency/Dose/Duration
In general, surgery should not be repeated. A second surgery may be necessary after careful
consideration if there are clearly identifiable and surgically treatable goals.
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

414

There is one surgical trial of different combinations of procedures; however, there was no
non-operatively managed group, non-treatment group, or sham-surgery control (Goeteyn et
al., 2020). Thus, there is no quality study on which to develop surgical treatment guidance.
Yet, surgery appears reasonable and potentially effective for those with clearly identifiable
and significantly symptomatic anatomical abnormality(ies), including cervical ribs, other
constrictive anatomic structure(s), and/or other objective evidence of impaired limb
function(s) (Chapman et al., 2021, Ann Freischlag, 2018, Henry et al., 2015, Yin et al., 2019,
Cook et al., 2021). Candidates for surgery should also have functional impairments. Thus,
surgery for TOS is selectively recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane
Library, and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Surgical
Procedures Operative, Surgery, Surgery Operative; Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, Thoracic
Outlet Compression Syndrome, controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 172 articles in PubMed, 1502 in Scopus, 0 in CINAHL, 0 in Cochrane
Library, 25,000 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 3
from PubMed, 3 from Scopus, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google
Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 7 articles considered for inclusion, 2 randomized
trials and 5 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

FOLLOW-UP VISITS
Patients with TOS generally require at least a few, and generally many, follow-up
appointments for purposes of performing diagnostic tests, monitoring symptoms and signs
for consistent findings, evaluating and advancing treatment, and gradually reducing
limitations if the progress allows. Patients with slower resolution, those in need of operative
care, or those with other accompanying disorders will require considerably greater numbers
of appointments. Frequencies of appointments may also be greater where workplace
limitations are required and job demands are higher. Postoperative rehabilitation can be
considerable, particularly in disputed TOS cases with workers compensation (1696,1853,1854). In
those cases, there may be a requirement for therapy on a prolonged basis to recover as
much function as possible.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

415

PECTORAL STRAINS AND TEARS
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The following section contains recommendations for evaluating and managing pectoral
strains and tears from the Evidence-Based Shoulder Disorders Panel. These
recommendations are based on critically appraised higher-quality research evidence or,
when such evidence was unavailable or inconsistent, on expert consensus as required in
ACOEM’s Methodology. Recommendations are made under the following categories:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Strongly Recommended, “A” Level
Moderately Recommended, “B” Level
Recommended, “C” Level
Insufficient – Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – No Recommendation (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – Not Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Not Recommended, “C” Level
Moderately Not Recommended, “B” Level
Strongly Not Recommended, “A” Level

OVERVIEW
Pectoral muscle tears or strains usually occur in the course of overwhelming or
supramaximal force, particularly in athletes involved in weightlifting, football (1857,1858), or
wrestling (1857,1859,1144). The most common mechanism is tear while bench-pressing heavy
weights (1860,1861) or similar trauma with eccentric loading of the pectoralis major muscle
(1859)
. Some potentially occupational causes include straight-line parachuting, and is mostly
reported in the military (1862), The injury may include complete tendon avulsion of the
sternal head of pectoralis major (rarely entire including clavicular head) or injury to a
myotendinous or intra muscular site. The term “strain” is sometimes erroneously utilized to
label virtually any muscle pain or ache, rather than the denotation of a muscle-tendon
junction partial or complete disruption.
There are no quality studies evaluating treatment for these disorders. As these strains are
true muscle-tendon unit strains, work/activity limitations are particularly indicated to
alleviate forceful exertions while allowing sufficient time to heal the strain. For complete
tears or ruptures of the pectoralis insertion, surgical repair is recommended.

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
X-RAYS
X-ray is the most basic of the anatomical tests. X-rays show bony structures and may be
used in pectoral strains to identify bony involvement.
X-RAYS FOR PECTORAL STRAINS
Recommended
X-rays are recommended for evaluation of acute, subacute, or chronic pectoral strains.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

416

Indications
Most patients with clinical pectoral strains.
Benefits
Diagnosis of a fracture involving the pectoral strain.
Harms
Negligible.
Rationale
X-rays are helpful to evaluate most patients with a pectoral strain, especially more severe
cases. X-rays can help to identify bony involvement. X-rays are non-invasive, low to
moderate cost, have low adverse effects, have clinical utility for this purpose, and therefore
are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: pectoralis muscles sprains and strains,
pectoralis muscles tears, pectoral strain, pectoral tear, pectoralis strain, pectoralis tear;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 53 articles in PubMed, 18,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 4 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources.
Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (CT)
Computed tomography is most useful for osseous imaging, whereas MRI is superior for softtissue imaging.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY FOR EVALUATION OF PECTORAL STRAINS
Sometimes Recommended
Computed tomography (CT) is recommended for the select evaluation of pectoral strains.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

417

Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
CT Imaging for pectoral strains may be selectively helpful where there is concern about bony
involvement. CT is also indicated where advanced imaging is indicated but there is a
contraindication for MRI (e.g., ferrous/metal implant).
Benefits
Diagnosis and understanding of the degree of bony involvement, especially in avulsion
injuries.
Harms
Radiation exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining a CT once is generally sufficient. For patients with chronic pectoral strains, it may
be reasonable to obtain a second CT later to re-evaluate the patient’s condition, particularly
if symptoms change.
Rationale
MRI is considered superior to computerized tomography for imaging most soft tissue
shoulder abnormalities where advanced imaging is usually the primary concern (e.g.,
assessing the degree of myotendinous rupture). However, where imaging calcified
structures is required, CT is considered superior. This includes bony involvement in a
pectoral strain and thus CT may be selectively recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: pectoralis muscles sprains and strains,
pectoralis muscles tears, pectoral strain, pectoral tear, pectoralis strain, pectoralis tear;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 53 articles in PubMed, 18,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 4 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources.
Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

418

review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

FUNCTIONAL CAPACITY EVALUATIONS
See Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (MRI)
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is often used as a secondary test after x-ray for many
shoulder joint problems because it tends to be helpful for imaging soft tissues (175,207,656-666).
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING FOR PECTORAL STRAINS
Recommended
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pectoralis is recommended for evaluating pectoral
strains.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Patients with clinically significant pectoral strains.
Benefits
Identify the severity of the pectoral strain, and help assess need of surgery (Synovec, 2020).
Harms
Negligible
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed, and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
A comparative study with two blinded radiologists compared MRI to subsequent
intraoperative assessment and reported MRI was 100% sensitive for detecting complete
grade 3 tears at the sternal head and clavicular head, 93% sensitive for tendon-bone tears at
the sternal head and 90% sensitive for tendon-bone tears at the clavicular head, although
the sensitivities were less for detection of grade 2 tears (Chang, 2016). MRI is considered
superior to CT for imaging most soft tissue shoulder abnormalities where advanced imaging
is usually the primary concern (e.g., assessing the degree of myotendinous rupture). Quality

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

419

evidence suggests MRI may help determine severity of the strain and plan whether surgery
is needed and thus is recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: pectoralis muscles sprains and strains,
pectoralis muscles tears, pectoral strain, pectoral tear, pectoralis strain, pectoralis tear;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 53 articles in PubMed, 18,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 4 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources.
Of the 4 articles considered for inclusion, 1 diagnostic and 0 systematic reviews met the
inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ULTRASOUND
Diagnostic ultrasound has been used for evaluating myotendinous abnormalities (207,694,715718,1863)
.
ULTRASOUND FOR PECTORAL STRAINS
Sometimes Recommended
Ultrasound (US) is recommended for selective use on patients suspected of having pectoral
strains.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Patients should have symptoms and signs of a clinically significant pectoral strain.
Ultrasound technicians should have sufficient skill to obviate the need for MRI or CT
scanning (Boykin et al., 2010, Hanchard et al., 2013); otherwise, the test introduces
unnecessary redundancy.
Benefits
Secure a diagnosis.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

420

Harms
False positives and false negatives.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Repeat ultrasound should be based on significant change in symptoms and/or examination
findings.
Rationale
Ultrasound has been found useful in quality studies for many soft tissue disorders. There are
no quality studies of pectoral strains. However, the pectoral muscles are highly accessible
and imageable by US.
Ultrasound is not invasive, is of low to moderate cost, and has little risk of adverse effects;
therefore, although there are concerns that MRI may be superior for imaging most shoulder
soft tissues, ultrasound is recommended. The main disadvantage is the high dependency on
the physician’s /ultrasonographer’s skills (Boykin et al., 2010, Hanchard et al., 2013). If the
ultrasonographer is inexperienced or otherwise unable to accurately determine severity
and/or the surgeon would nevertheless order an MRI, then US is not indicated because it
would introduce needless imaging and costs.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: pectoralis muscles sprains and strains,
pectoralis muscles tears, pectoral strain, pectoral tear, pectoralis strain, pectoralis tear;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 53 articles in PubMed, 18,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 4 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources.
Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

421

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
SURGERY FOR COMPLETE TEARS OR RUPTURES OF THE PECTORALIS INSERTION
Recommended
Surgery is recommended for patients with complete or nearly complete tears or ruptures of
the pectoralis major insertion (Bodendorfer et al., 2020).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Severe pectoralis major strains with complete or nearly complete pectoralis muscle
ruptures. Pectoralis minor tears are infrequent, and typically treated non-operatively.
Benefits
Restoration of normal shoulder function.
Harms
Surgical complications, such as adhesive capsulitis, failure to heal, infections.
Rationale
There are no quality trials for surgical repair of pectoral muscle ruptures. The pectoralis
muscle is required for normal function, and thus surgical repair is generally indicated for
completed or nearly complete/severe ruptures.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: pectoralis muscles sprains and strains,
pectoralis muscles tears, pectoral strain, pectoral tear, pectoralis strain, pectoralis tear;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 53 articles in PubMed, 18,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 4 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources.
Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

422

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SHOULDER DISLOCATION AND INSTABILITY
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The following section contains recommendations for evaluating and managing shoulder
dislocations and instability from the Evidence-Based Shoulder Disorders Panel. These
recommendations are based on critically appraised higher-quality research evidence or,
when such evidence was unavailable or inconsistent, on expert consensus as required in
ACOEM’s Methodology. Recommendations are made under the following categories:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Strongly Recommended, “A” Level
Moderately Recommended, “B” Level
Recommended, “C” Level
Insufficient – Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – No Recommendation (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – Not Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Not Recommended, “C” Level
Moderately Not Recommended, “B” Level
Strongly Not Recommended, “A” Level

OVERVIEW
Shoulder dislocations typically occur only after at least one traumatic event with dislocation,
commonly from athletic injury or falls (1864,1865). However, some dislocations may occur in
the absence of trauma with conditions such as hyperlaxity (1866,1867). The general prevalence
of shoulder dislocation is noted to be about equal before and after age 40 years old,
although the pathophysiology and associated injuries change with advancing age.
Individuals under 40 generally have dislocations due to accidents or sports (1868), with
increased risk in the elderly often related to falls (1869). The primary pathology in younger
patients is labral tearing and capsular stretching. With advancing age, additional
pathological problems, such as associated rotator cuff tears and proximal humeral fractures,
become more common.
The incidence rate ranges from 8. 2-26. 2/100,000 person-years (436,1868,1869) and the lifetime
cumulative incidence has been estimated at 2% (1870). The most common type of dislocation
is caused by forced abduction with external rotation and results in anterior and inferior
dislocation of the humeral head. Posterior dislocation of the humeral head is much less
common than anterior dislocation and typically results from direct blow to the anterior
shoulder (posteriorly directed force) or fall onto outstretched hand (1867). The classic
presentation of a posterior glenohumeral dislocation is an internally rotated shoulder with
inability to elevate or externally rotate. The anterior shoulder appears flattened and the
posterior shoulder is more prominent. After an initial shoulder dislocation, recurrence is the
most commonly reported sequela with rates as high as 100% in adolescent athletes (1871).
Recurrences generally occur with a less traumatic event or no trauma at all. The direction of
the dislocation and resultant instability is important for diagnostic purposes, as well as
planning potential surgical repair (1872).
Once a shoulder has dislocated, it can be prone to symptoms of instability, termed
“shoulder instability" (1873). Shoulder instability is defined as pain associated with loss of
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

423

shoulder function due to excessive translation of the humeral head in the glenoid fossa (1873).
Instability is more commonly anterior, however posterior, multi-directional and inferior
instability also occur. When instability has been identified, non-operative treatment is
usually recommended prior to attempted surgical repair (1873).
Non-operative treatment has been traditionally recommended for anterior dislocation (1874)
(1875-1879)
. Yet, the risk of recurrence is estimated at 53% (1868,423). Some evidence supports
early surgical repair after the first dislocation in younger patients in order to prevent
recurrence (1864,1880-1883). Regardless, surgery has been traditionally utilized among patients
with recurrent dislocations or among athletes (1880,1884,1885).

DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
A thorough history is important for diagnostic considerations, and should include history of
prior dislocations, history of recurrent instability, documented dislocation needing reduction
by a clinician. Clinicians should obtain a history for recurrent instability with daily activities.
The literature on physical examination maneuvers for instability has limitations (571).
However, the examiner should test for signs of multidirectional instability and hypermobility
with sulcus sign (1886). In addition, positive shoulder apprehension in the midrange of
abduction (30 to 90 degrees) with limited external rotation, and anterior translation of the
humeral head over the glenoid rim are suggestive of glenoid bone loss (1887,1888). A thorough
neurovascular examination should be performed, paying special attention to the axillary
nerve. Axillary nerve palsy is usually presented as a loss of shoulder abduction and loss of
sensation in the proximal-lateral aspect of the arm. The arm should be evaluated for
brachial plexus injury, which is usually represented as a sensory and/or motor weakness
distally in the arm (1889).
The relocation, anterior release tests and apprehension signs may be used to demonstrate
instability to aid diagnosis. Biceps load I and II tests and internal rotation resistance strength
are thought to be more helpful for diagnosing labral lesions (35). One comparative study
found the overall accuracy of 6 clinical tests (apprehension, relocation, release, anterior
drawer, load and shift, and hyperabduction) to range from 80.5-86.4% compared with MRA
(1248)
. However, there are no standardized diagnostic criteria.
X-ray and MRI are used to assist in the diagnosis of shoulder dislocation or instability and/or
their complications. Dislocations require plain radiograph (axillary lateral view) or CT scan to
visualize the humeral head in glenoid fossa and to determine bone loss on the anterior
glenoid, posterior glenoid and humeral head (Hill-Sachs and Reverse Hill-Sachs lesions). Xrays may be needed of both shoulders, particularly if there was a bilateral injury or a need
for comparison with the unaffected shoulder. Other studies may be helpful, including MRI,
MR arthrogram, or CT arthrogram, especially for evaluation of potential concomitant
Bankart lesions or labral or rotator cuff tears (123,1865,1873).

WORK LIMITATIONS
Patients with acute dislocations are generally able to return to occupational activities;
however, rates of return are generally lower for highly physically demanding jobs and
athletic endeavors (1890). Limitations, if needed, are gradually reduced as recovery
progresses. Most workers continue to perform their job tasks while avoiding activities that
provoke feelings of instability or frank dislocations even without formal restrictions. If

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

424

surgery is performed, there is a similar need for workplace limitations which are gradually
reduced.

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
X-RAYS
X-rays show bony structures and are the initial test to evaluate most cases of shoulder pain
and dislocations (50,610).
X-RAYS FOR SHOULDER DISLOCATIONS AND INSTABILITY
Recommended
X-rays are recommended for evaluation of shoulder dislocation and instability.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
All patients with shoulder dislocation and instability. X-rays help define the osseous
anatomy and identify fractures for acute dislocations. X-rays of both shoulders are
sometimes indicated for comparative purposes.
Benefits
Definition of the anatomy, identification of fracture, comparative anatomy if both shoulders
are x-rayed.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining x-rays once is generally sufficient with two to three views for instability. Plain
radiographs should include anterior-posterior, scapula Y-view, and if possible an axillary
view to fully evaluate the bony structures. Sometimes post-relocation x-rays are obtained.
Rationale
There are no quality studies of x-rays for dislocation or instability. X-rays are helpful to
identify fractures in those with acute dislocation. X-rays can help define the anatomy and
comparative anatomy for the contralateral shoulder; thus, x-rays are indicated for
dislocations and instability.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

425

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 44 articles considered for inclusion, 1 diagnostic study and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Computed tomography (CT) remains an important imaging procedure, particularly for bony
anatomy, whereas MRI is superior for soft tissue abnormalities. The most common
pathology identified during imaging or arthroscopy is a labral tear. However, bony injury
including bony Bankhart lesion, Hill-Sachs lesion, and significant glenoid bone loss that may
suggest alternate treatment is often seen with CT (1891,1892). CT is useful in identifying
shoulder joint pathology where advanced imaging of the bones is required (i.e., complex
proximal humerus fracture, scapular fracture) and to evaluate the anatomy in patients with
contraindication for MRI. CT scan is also indicated in patients with a history of more than
one shoulder dislocation to evaluate for clinically significant glenoid bone loss and to
evaluate for engaging hill-Sachs lesion which are important for surgical planning
(1893,1894,1895)
.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY FOR EVALUATION OF SHOULDER DISLOCATIONS
Sometimes Recommended
Computed tomography (CT) is recommended for the select evaluation of dislocations with
potential occult, complex proximal humeral and glenoid/scapular fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Imaging for shoulder dislocations with concerns for occult, complex proximal humeral and
glenoid/scapular fractures or other calcified structures, evaluation of engaging Hill-Sachs
Lesion, loose fragments, and Bony Bankhart lesion in addition to rotator cuff tear. For most
shoulder conditions, MRI is superior. CT is also indicated where advanced imaging is
indicated but there is a contraindication for MRI (e.g., ferrous/metal implant). CT
arthrogram is often preferred when evaluating posterior or anterior glenohumeral

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

426

instability when the bony anatomy needs to be better defined – glenoid deficiency and
humeral Hill-Sachs – because MRI is not as good for bone imaging.
Benefits
Diagnosis of occult fractures, and understanding of the degree of complex fractures, calcific
tendinitis.
Harms
Radiation exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining a CT once is generally sufficient. For patients with chronic shoulder pain, it may be
reasonable to obtain a second CT later to re-evaluate the patient’s condition, particularly if
symptoms change.
Rationale
MRI is considered superior to computed tomography for imaging most shoulder soft tissue
abnormalities. However, where imaging calcified structures is required, CT is considered
superior. This includes identifying occult fractures, complex proximal humeral and
glenoid/scapular fractures. CT arthrogram can be used in place of MRI to evaluate for
rotator cuff tear. A contrast CT study is minimally invasive, has few, if any, adverse effects
but is costly. It is recommended for select use.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

427

LOCAL ANESTHETIC INJECTIONS
See Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy Injections.

FUNCTIONAL CAPACITY EVALUATIONS
See Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is often used as a secondary test after x-ray for many
shoulder joint problems. MRI tends to be helpful for imaging soft tissues, particularly the
rotator cuff, but also the joint capsule (175,207,658-666).
MRI FOR SHOULDER DISLOCATION AND INSTABILITY
Recommended
MRI is recommended for imaging shoulder joints after dislocation and selectively for those
with instability. MRI is especially helpful for those with concerns about a concomitant
rotator cuff tear.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Patients sustaining a shoulder dislocation, also selectively for those with instability.
Particularly indicated for those with concerns of a concomitant rotator cuff tear. If there are
concerns for labral tear, MR Arthrography is indicated instead of MRI.
Benefits
Assist in securing a diagnosis and confirming associated pathology.
Harms
False positives and false negatives for rotator cuff tears.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
There are no quality studies of MRI for shoulder dislocation or instability. MRI may be
helpful to identify the degree of capsular disruption, but it is especially helpful to define
rotator cuff pathology (Cartland et al., 1992) (Tirman et al., 1994) (Wnorowski et al., 1997)
(Connell et al., 1999) (Tuite et al., 2000) (Tung et al., 2000) (Ardic et al., 2006) (Chang et al.,
2006) (Reuss et al., 2006) (Chang et al., 2008) (Pandya et al., 2008) (McFarland et al., 2009)
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

428

(Mulyadi et al., 2009), which may accompany dislocations. If there are concerns about labral
tears, MR arthrography is recommended. MRI is not invasive, has negligible adverse effects,
but is costly. MRI is not recommended for routine shoulder imaging but is recommended for
select use after dislocation and/or instability, particularly involving concerns regarding soft
tissue pathology.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 44 articles considered for inclusion, 4 diagnostic articles and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE ARTHROGRAM
Magnetic resonance (MR) arthrography combines an MRI with an arthrogram to overcome
MRI limitations and is usually performed in preference to CT arthrography unless bony
structure definition is also needed (705,706). MR arthrography is particularly thought to be
effective for imaging labral pathology (148,385,707-712). Arthrography involves the injection of
contrast into the joint. It was modified in the 1970s to include injection of air (“double
contrast”) (614). Arthrography under fluoroscopy in isolation has now been almost entirely
replaced by other procedures, including MRI and MR arthrography, primarily due to its low
sensitivity for full-thickness tears and essentially no sensitivity for partial thickness tears
(1896)
. Most arthrograms including MR arthrogram and CT arthrogram are performed using
fluoroscopy to localize the joint and inject the contrast agent.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE ARTHROGRAM FOR SHOULDER DISLOCATIONS AND INSTABILITY
Recommended
Magnetic resonance (MR) arthrography is recommended for those with dislocation and/or
instability, especially for diagnosing labral tears.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

429

Patients with dislocation and/or instability who also have symptoms or clinical suspicion of
labral tears.
Benefits
Secure a diagnosis.
Harms
False positives and false negatives for labral tears. Arthrography improves the accuracy
especially regarding complete rotator cuff tears and significant labral tears. Small risk of
infection and complications from the injection.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed, and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
MR arthrograms have not been evaluated in quality studies among patients with dislocation
and/or instability. Although studies are heterogeneous, pooled estimates of the sensitivity
for full-thickness tears is estimated at 95% with specificity 93% (Dinnes et al., 2003). There is
high prevalence for labral injury with first shoulder dislocation based on MR arthrography
(MRA) (Antonio et al., 2007). A comparison of high- versus low-field MR imaging for SLAP
tears among symptomatic patients found high field superior for diagnosing SLAP (Tung et
al., 2000). The sensitivity of high-field MRA was 90% and specificity was 63%, while
sensitivity of low-field MRA was 64% with 70% specificity. MRA was found to be superior to
CT arthrography (CTA) and marginally better than MRI for identification of labral tears in a
case series of patients with recurrent anterior instability, prior anterior dislocation, or
shoulder pain of unknown cause (Chandnani et al., 1993). MRA sensitivity for a labral tear
was 96. 4%, MRI was 92. 9%, and CTA was 73. 1%. Specificity was 100% for all three tests;
however, this appears overstated as there were only two patients without a tear in this
small case series. MR arthrography is invasive, has adverse effects including a low, but
definite risk of infection and is painful. It is also costly, although MRA has been felt to
provide better cost effectiveness than MRI or CT arthrography for select diagnoses (Oh et
al., 1999). It is likely the best imaging procedure available for patients thought to have labral
tears or patients with good strength in order to assess the labrum and rotator cuff with
traumatic injury simultaneously; thus, it is recommended for select use among patients with
dislocation and/or instability.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

430

trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 44 articles considered for inclusion, 7 diagnostic studies and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ULTRASOUND
Diagnostic ultrasound has been used for evaluating shoulder dislocations and instability
(207,694,715-718)
.
ULTRASOUND FOR SHOULDER DISLOCATIONS AND INSTABILITY
Sometimes Recommended
Ultrasound is recommended for selective use on patients with dislocation and/or instability.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Patients with shoulder dislocation and/or instability. May be helpful for evaluating
concomitant rotator cuff tears. Ultrasound technicians should have sufficient skill to obviate
the need for scanning (Boykin et al., 2010, Hanchard et al., 2013). Otherwise, the test
introduces unnecessary redundancy and expense.
Benefits
Assist in securing a diagnosis and treatment plan.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Repeat ultrasound should be based on significant change in symptoms and/or examination
findings.
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

431

One moderate-quality study suggested 100% sensitivity of US for the detection of shoulder
dislocation (Abbasi et al., 2013). There are no quality studies of ultrasound for dislocation or
instability. Ultrasound in skilled hands may help define abnormalities, including anatomy,
rotator cuff tears, and fractures. Ultrasound is not invasive, is of low to moderate cost, and
has little risk of adverse effects; therefore, although there are concerns that MRI may be
superior for imaging most shoulder soft tissues, ultrasound is recommended particularly for
evaluation of accompanying rotator cuff tears. The main disadvantage is the high
dependency on the physician’s skills (Boykin et al., 2010, Hanchard et al., 2013). If the
ultrasound does not obviate the need for imaging (MRI or CT), then it introduces
unnecessary expense.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 44 articles considered for inclusion, 4 diagnostic studies and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SINGLE-PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT)
Single-proton emission computed tomography (SPECT) is a three-dimensional imaging
technique.
SPECT FOR SHOULDER DISLOCATION AND INSTABILITY
Not Recommended
Single-proton emission computed tomography (SPECT) is not recommended for the
evaluation of patients with shoulder disorders.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
SPECT is not recommended for the evaluation of patients with shoulder disorders.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

432

Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of shoulder dislocation or instability, and they are not believed to
provide significant additional information above more standard imaging techniques. Thus,
they are not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET)
PET FOR SHOULDER DISLOCATION AND INSTABILITY
Not Recommended
Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning is not recommended for the evaluation of
patients with shoulder disorders.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of shoulder dislocation or instability, and they are not believed to
provide significant additional information above more standard imaging techniques. Thus,
they are not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

433

controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

DIAGNOSTIC INJECTIONS
Diagnostic injections particularly of the subacromial space, glenohumeral joint, and
acromioclavicular joint are sometimes performed. However, they are nearly always
performed in combination with a therapeutic intervention, such as a ketorolac or
glucocorticosteroid injection. However, a glucocorticoid injection is generally inadvisable if
surgery is believed to be likely due to worse outcomes (1897,1898,1899,1900). Injection with a
therapeutic agent is nearly always preferable due to less overall invasiveness with 1
injection rather than 2, as well as the potential to assess the patient both immediately postinjection for diagnostic purposes and over the longer term for therapeutic purposes (see the
recommendation for subacromial injections in Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy).

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
INITIAL CARE
In the absence of fractures, initial care of a dislocation involves relocation as soon as
possible. Anesthesia may be required if there is sufficient muscle tightness or spasm and
manual relocation is unsuccessful. The longer the time after the dislocation, the greater the
probability that anesthesia will be necessary for relocation. Surgery may be required for
cases with fractures. Over-the-counter analgesics and self-applications of heat and ice are
recommended, and slings may be attempted for treatment acutely, with use gradually
weaned.
Patients with first-time dislocation or initial instability are recommended to undergo initial
immobilization with a sling for 2 to 3 weeks and early exercise program while avoiding at
risk position of abduction and external rotation (1901). Sling immobilization in external
rotation is hypothesized to tighten the musculotendinous complex of the subscapularis,
thereby closing the anterior joint cavity and reducing the labrum back to the glenoid rim in
more anatomic position and improve healing of Bankhart lesion (1902). Multicenter
randomized clinical trial of patients with first-time dislocation suggested that the recurrence
rate was significantly lower in the external rotation group (26%) than that in the internal
rotation group (42%). In the subgroup of patients aged 30 years or younger, the relative risk
reduction was 46. 1% (1903). Once the sling is discontinued, strengthening exercises under the
supervision of a physical therapist are recommended (1904,1905).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

434

SELF-REDUCTION FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION
Recommended
Self-reduction of recurring shoulder dislocations is recommended for treatment of shoulder
dislocation.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Patients with recurrent shoulder dislocation, especially those who delay or decline surgery
Benefits
Self-management of the dislocation. May be particularly helpful for those who are distant
from medical care.
Harms
Negligible.
Rationale
There are two moderate-quality randomized controlled trials, with both suggesting efficacy
in teaching various methods of self-reduction to those patients who have recurrences,
especially the Milch and Boss-Holtzach-Matter techniques, with 53-55% rates of efficacy
(Marcano-Fernández et al., 2018, Marcano-Fernández et al., 2020, Chechik et al., 2021). One
of these trials suggest self-reduction should also be preferentially performed in the
emergency department due to less pain (Marcano-Fernández et al., 2020). Thus, teaching
self-reduction is a potential intervention, especially among those at risk of recurrence and
especially among those without nearby assistance.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 44 articles considered for inclusion, 3 randomized trials and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

435

review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
OTC ANALGESICS FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION
Recommended
Over-the-counter analgesics are recommended for treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Shoulder dislocation and other shoulder pain.
Benefits
Self-management of the pain.
Harms
Negligible for OTC analgesics unless acetaminophen doses exceed 3. 5g, or the patient has
liver disease or other contraindication.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Analgesics should be used per manufacturer’s recommendations.
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating analgesics for managing shoulder dislocations.
However, analgesics and OTC NSAIDs are likely helpful and there is some quality evidence
for the use of prescription NSAIDs for other shoulder nociceptive pain (see NSAIDs for
Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy); thus, they are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

436

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SELF-APPLICATION OF HEAT OR ICE FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION
Recommended
Self-application of heat or ice is recommended for treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Shoulder dislocation and associated injuries.
Benefits
Self-management of pain.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Ice and heat are typically used 3-5 times a day.
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating ice or heat for managing shoulder dislocations. Selfapplications of heat and ice may be helpful for self-management of symptoms, are not
invasive, have low adverse effects, not costly, and are believed to be helpful for treating
symptoms; thus, they are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

437

We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ACTIVITY MODIFICATION AND EXERCISE
RANGE-OF-MOTION EXERCISES FOR SHOULDER DISLOCATIONS
Recommended
Range-of-motion exercises are recommended for treatment of patients with shoulder
dislocation after relocation.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Shoulder dislocation patients, especially in the acute to subacute and/or postoperative
phases. Also for those with limited range of motion (ROM) in the chronic phase. Generally,
instability patients do not need range-of-motion exercises.
Benefits
Improved ROM, prevention of adhesive capsulitis. Accelerated post-operative recovery.
Harms
May increase pain if aggressive range of motion is instituted, although tolerance of such
may be cautiously needed if there is adhesive capsulitis to be treated or has begun to set in.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A self-directed program as tolerated (patients who also have a rotator cuff tear or labral
tear often do not tolerate strenuous stretching). Supervised programs may be indicated for
patients who require supervision initially or otherwise need assistance with motivation or
concomitant fear avoidant belief training (see Chronic Pain and Low Back Disorders
Guidelines) for a few appointments to help initiate the program.
Additional supervised appointments are indicated for patients who fail to progress or need
greater supervision, such as for ongoing fear avoidant beliefs (Ludewig et al., 2003). Dose
unclear for patients with shoulder pain; common regimens of ROM exercises performed 1 to
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

438

3 times a day. For those needing a supervised program, 2-3 appointments per week for 3-4
weeks are often needed, during which strengthening exercises are added. An additional 2-4
weeks is occasionally needed to fully rehabilitate and achieve a plateau. For those who can
adhere to a self-directed program, weekly appointments may suffice. Results of the exercise
prescription should be regularly monitored and failure to progressively improve is an
indication to either revisit the differential diagnosis and/or seek a second
opinion/consultation, particularly by the time approximately 6-12 therapy appointments is
reached.
Indications for discontinuation
Achievement of normal ROM, non-compliance, development of other disorders. If normal
range of motion is achieved, but further strengthening is required, additional appointments
may be needed (see Strengthening Exercises).
Rationale
There are no quality studies for treatment of shoulder dislocations, postoperative
rehabilitation, or instability. Range-of-motion exercises are helpful for recovery of function
and prevention of adhesive capsulitis and are recommended. Transition to strengthening
exercises is typically part of the rehabilitation program.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 44 articles considered for inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
STRENGTHENING EXERCISES FOR SHOULDER DISLOCATIONS AND INSTABILITY
Recommended
Strengthening exercises are recommended for treatment of patients with shoulder
dislocations and instability.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

439

Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Shoulder dislocations, especially after the acute phase post-dislocation or surgery has
subsided. Strengthening exercises are also indicated for patients with instability who are not
thought to be surgical candidates, or decline surgery.
Benefits
Improved function and recovery. Potential to reduce instability symptoms.
Harms
May increase pain as the program progresses and with each step-up in exercise.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A supervised treatment program is often begun with a set of appointments, e.g. : 2-3
appointments/week for 2-3 weeks. Another set of appointments may be needed for more
severe cases and/or those who have not achieved treatment goals including reaching a
plateau. Additional appointments should be based on documentation of ongoing,
incremental functional gains. Results of the exercise prescription should be regularly
monitored and failure to progressively improve is an indication to either revisit the
differential diagnosis and/or seek a second opinion/consultation, particularly by the time
approximately 6-12 therapy appointments is reached
Indications for discontinuation
Achievement of normal function, reaching a plateau, development of a strain,
noncompliance, failure to improve.
Rationale
One RCT suggested superiority of shoulder instability neuromuscular exercise compared
with a home-based standard program for patients with a traumatic anterior shoulder
dislocation (Eshoj et al., 2020). Another trial reported superiority of Watson to Rockwood
exercises for multi-directional instability (Warby, 2017). There is one moderate quality
experimental trial of a single appointment of exercises suggesting efficacy of glenohumeral
plus scapular stabilization exercises for patients with shoulder pain, although the patients
are not well characterized (Jeon et al., 2018).
Although there are few quality trials of strengthening exercises for shoulder dislocations or
instability, these exercises are thought to be essential to achieve normal function. However,
there is insufficient evidence to clearly define superiority of one exercise or regimen over
another.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

440

Strengthening/stabilization exercises are not invasive, have low adverse effects, and are low
to moderate cost depending on the numbers of appointments. They may be high cost when
performed as part of a lengthy supervised program; however, those intensive courses of
therapy may be needed in some severe cases and also with cases of fear avoidant beliefs
and catastrophizing.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 44 articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MEDICATIONS
NSAIDs and acetaminophen are recommended for pain management for patients with
shoulder dislocation. Prescription medications might be needed in moderate to severe
cases. In select cases, patients may require judicious short-term use of opioids for acute
pain management with a severe first dislocation (i.e., typically not beyond 3 days). Other
recommended medications for pain management include muscle relaxants, capsaicin,
tricyclic anti-depressants or dual reuptake inhibiting anti-depressants for chronic pain (but
not SSRI antidepressants which are not effective for nociceptive pain), or gabapentin for
peri-operative use. Patients with instability generally require no medication other than postoperatively.
There is no quality literature specific to shoulder dislocations or postoperative instability for
nearly all of the following interventions. In the absence of quality evidence, it is
recommended that shoulder dislocations and postoperative instability be managed
according to the recommendations for Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy and Shoulder Pain:
●
NSAIDs for Treatment of Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies and Shoulder Pain [Strongly
Recommended, Evidence (A)]
●
Acetaminophen for Acute, Subacute, Chronic, or Post-operative Shoulder Pain
[Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

441

●
Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibiting Anti-depressants for Subacute or Chronic
Shoulder Girdle Pain [Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors for Acute, Subacute, or Chronic Shoulder
Pain and Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Anti-convulsants for Acute, Subacute or Chronic Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathies [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Capsicum Creams for Acute, Subacute, Chronic Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathy [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Topical NSAIDs, including Diclofenac Epolamine for Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathy [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Topical Glyceryl Trinitrate, Lidocaine Patches, Eutectic Mixture of Local Anesthetics
(EMLA), and Other Creams/Ointments for Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy
[Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
See also the ACOEM Opioids guideline for the treatment of subacute and chronic pain.

DEVICES
SLINGS, INCLUDING AN EXTERNAL ROTATION BRACE, FOR INITIAL TREATMENT ACUTELY
FOR SHOULDER DISLOCATION
Recommended
Slings, especially an external rotation brace, are recommended as an option for initial
treatment acutely for shoulder dislocation.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
After relocation for an acute dislocation, especially first dislocations with severe pain and
joint swelling. Should be used with physical therapy and/or pendulum exercises
approximately 3x/day prior to beginning a formal therapy program.
Benefits
Short-term improved pain and rest.
Harms
Potential for debility, adhesive capsulitis especially if the sling is used for a prolonged period
of time, particularly if without performing range-of-motion exercises.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Gradually wean. Pendulum exercises are generally recommended, including within the first
few days after injury.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

442

Indications for discontinuation
Use beyond approximately 1-2 weeks, reduced acute swelling and inflammatory stage.
Rationale
There are several trials regarding external immobilization which conflict regarding efficacy,
whether the trials compared external/internal immobilization or external
mobilization/slings. Two trials suggest efficacy of external vs. internal immobilization (Itoi et
al., 2003) (Liavaag et al., 2009). However, another trial found lack of efficacy (Finestone et
al., 2009) and another reported a non-significant 38. 9% reduction in dislocations with
external immobilization vs. internal immobilization over 2 years with significant risk
reduction among those aged 20-40 years (Murray et al., 2020). Trials conflict regarding
whether external immobilization is superior to a sling, with one study suggesting efficacy
(Itoi et al., 2003) while another suggested no differences (37% vs. 40% dislocations) with
external immobilization vs. sling (Whelan et al., 2014). Because the quality studies conflict,
there is no recommendation for a specific device or position.
There is no comparative trial with an absence of sling or immobilization, but these devices
may help manage acute pain associated with shoulder dislocations and help soft tissue
healing; thus, they are recommended. An external rotation brace may be used instead of a
sling to treat anterior glenohumeral dislocations as most of these have an anterior inferior
labral tear. The external rotation position theoretically reduces the labrum so that it may
heal in a more anatomic position (Itoi et al., 2001). Performance of pendulum exercises is
usually indicated in part to prevent the potential development of adhesive capsulitis.
Slings are not recommended for shoulder instability because the condition is chronic and
slings promote debility over time.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 44 articles considered for inclusion, 8 randomized trials and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

443

SLINGS FOR TREATMENT OF CHRONIC SHOULDER INSTABILITY
Not Recommended
Slings are not recommended for treatment of chronic shoulder instability beyond acute
dislocations.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Rationale
There are no quality studies of using slings for instability. Slings may help manage acute pain
associated with shoulder dislocations and help soft tissue healing. However, slings are not
recommended for shoulder instability as the condition is chronic and slings promote debility
and increase risk of adhesive capsulitis over time.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
TAPING FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION OR INSTABILITY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of taping for the treatment of shoulder
dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of taping for
treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

444

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MAGNETS FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION OR INSTABILITY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of magnets for the treatment of
shoulder dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of magnets
for treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

445

we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ALLIED HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
ACUPUNCTURE FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION OR INSTABILITY
Not Recommended
Acupuncture is not recommended for treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability in the
absence of chronic pain.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Acupuncture may be modestly effective for treatment of chronic shoulder pain (see Rotator
Cuff Tendinopathies). However, most patients with a dislocation or instability do not have
chronic pain. One trial of dry needling after shoulder stabilization repair found a lack of
efficacy over one year (Halle, Crowell et al.). Acupuncture might be indicated for select
patients with chronic pain who do not have sufficient pain control with other interventions.
Thus, acupuncture is not recommended for treatment of shoulder dislocation and
instability.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 44 articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

446

DIATHERMY FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION OR INSTABILITY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of diathermy for the treatment of
shoulder dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of diathermy
for treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
INFRARED THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION OR INSTABILITY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of infrared therapy for the treatment of
shoulder dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of infrared
therapy for treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Evidence
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

447

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ULTRASOUND FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION OR INSTABILITY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of ultrasound for the treatment of
shoulder dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of ultrasound
for treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

448

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
LASER THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION OR INSTABILITY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of laser therapy for the treatment of
shoulder dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of laser
therapy for treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANUAL THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION OR INSTABILITY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of manual therapy for the treatment of
shoulder dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of manual
therapy for treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

449

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANIPULATION FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION OR INSTABILITY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of manipulation for the treatment of
shoulder dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
manipulation for treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

450

we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MASSAGE FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION OR INSTABILITY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of massage for the treatment of
shoulder dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of massage
for treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
HIGH-VOLTAGE GALVANIC THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION OR
INSTABILITY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of high-voltage galvanic therapy for the
treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

451

There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of highvoltage galvanic therapy for treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
H-WAVE® DEVICE STIMULATION FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION OR
INSTABILITY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of H-wave® Device Stimulation for
treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of H-wave®
Device Stimulation for treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

452

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
IONTOPHORESIS FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION OR INSTABILITY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of iontophoresis for the treatment of
shoulder dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
iontophoresis for treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MICROCURRENT FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION OR INSTABILITY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of microcurrent for the treatment of
shoulder dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

453

Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
microcurrent for treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PERCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER
DISLOCATION OR INSTABILITY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of percutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (PENS) for the treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of PENS for
treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

454

We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
TRANSCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER
DISLOCATION OR INSTABILITY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of transcutaneous electrical stimulation
(TENS) for treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of TENS for
treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SYMPATHETIC ELECTROTHERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION OR
INSTABILITY
No Recommendation

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

455

There is no recommendation for or against the use of sympathetic electrotherapy for the
treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
sympathetic electrotherapy for treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PULSED ELECTROMAGNETIC
FREQUENCY FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION OR INSTABILITY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of pulsed electromagnetic frequency for
the treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of pulsed
electromagnetic frequency for treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

456

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
INTERFERENTIAL THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION OR INSTABILITY
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of interferential therapy for the
treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
interferential therapy for treatment of shoulder dislocation or instability.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

457

INJECTION THERAPIES
Injections are generally not required for dislocations and are not recommended for
treatment of acute dislocations. Injections are occasionally needed subsequently for
concomitant rotator cuff tendinopathies or among patients who have delayed recovery for
unclear reasons and in whom an empiric injection for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes is
performed (see Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy Injections).
One trial of dry needling after shoulder stabilization repair found a lack of efficacy over 1
year (1057).

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Non-operative and surgery have both been widely used for the treatment of dislocations.
Surgical techniques vary depending on factors including the kind of dislocation, comitant
injuries, timing after injury as well as the skills and strength of the treating clinician.
Recreational and occupational demands may lead one to have surgery after an initial
dislocation, but for most patients the results of surgery after a recurrence should be
equivalent to surgery after first dislocation. The dislocation recurrence rate has been
reported at 17 to 96% (1865-1927).
A systematic review found an overall summary estimate of 39% (452) and a recurrence rate of
53% among those with anterior dislocations managed by physiotherapy (452). Another
systematic review of arthroscopic Bankart repairs vs. conservative management for a firsttime anterior dislocation found a recurrent instability rate of 9. 7% vs. 67. 4%, and a higher
rate of return to play of 92. 8% vs. 80. 8% (1928) and another review found lower recurrence
rates with operative repair at 10 years (1929). Recurrence of dislocation has been attributed
to anterior labral injuries (1881,1884,1930-1932) and has been used to justify attempted repairs.
Younger age and male sex have been consistently associated with increased risk of
recurrence of dislocation (1907,1909,1868,1883,452), providing some rationale for greater use of
surgical treatments, especially in younger patients with dislocations.
Surgical approaches to shoulder instability include arthroscopic (1933-1976) and open
procedures, most frequently Bankart (capsule and labral repairs) repairs (1909,1977-1984).
Trials comparing arthroscopic and open approaches for patients with recurrent anterior
dislocations found no unequivocal evidence of superiority of one approach over the other
(1985-1987)
, although overall there appears to be modestly faster recovery with arthroscopic
approaches over the first several postoperative months (1987). Arthroscopic
capsulolabroplasty and capsulolabral augmentation have been reported for management of
posteroinferior instability. (1958,1107). For posterior instability, no differences between open
and arthroscopic approaches have been reported (1867), although none of the available
studies are RCTs.
The outcome of surgical treatment after dislocation is highly correlated with the extent of
glenoid bone loss and presence of engaging Hill-Sachs lesion (1889,1988,1989). The concept of ontrack and off-track lesions describes the relationship of the Hill-Sachs lesion and the glenoid.
In on-track lesions, the Hills-Sachs lesion remains within the glenoid normal zone of contact
in the end range of motion. In off-track lesion, the edge of the Hill-Sachs lesion translates
more medially than the medial border of the glenoid normal zone of contact (1990,1991). The
on-track and off-track concept has been shown to reliably predict surgical outcomes and
recurrent instability (1887,1992). Glenoid bone loss of greater than 20% is major risk factor for
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

458

failure of arthroscopic Bankhart repair (1889,1990). In case of glenoid bone loss greater than
20%, open versus arthroscopic glenoid bone grafting or coracoid sling bone grating
technique (example Latarjet procedure) should be considered (1992,1993,1994). In case of offtrack lesions, in addition to arthroscopic Bankhart repair, Remplissage procedure to fill in
the engaging Hill-Sachs lesion and bone grafting is recommended to reduce surgical failure
and risk of recurrent dislocation (1989,1995).
REDUCTION OF DISLOCATED SHOULDERS
Recommended
Relocation is recommended after dislocation. Relocation under anesthesia is recommended
if an attempted relocation without anesthesia is unsuccessful.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Dislocated shoulder.
Benefits
Relocate shoulder and restore function.
Harms
Can fail to relocate, neurovascular injury, (further) rotator cuff injury.
Indications for discontinuation
Generally, after 1-2 attempts to relocate the shoulder, further attempts are best deferred
until after the patient is under anesthesia.
Rationale
Dislocated shoulders are best relocated as soon as possible. The longer the delay, the more
likely that muscles will sufficiently contract to result in a need to perform the relocation
under anesthesia. After relocation, immobilization and/or sling use is prescribed typically
along with therapy. Patients have been successfully taught self-relocation (Chechik et al.,
2021, Marcano-Fernández et al., 2018, Marcano-Fernández et al., 2020).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

459

reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ARTHROSCOPIC SURGERY FOR SHOULDER DISLOCATION AND INSTABILITY
Recommended
Arthroscopy or open surgery is recommended for evaluation and treatment of patients with
dislocation and instability.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Shoulder dislocation or instability, including after a first traumatic dislocation. There is no
requirement to have rehabilitation prior to surgery if there is a dislocation which has
occurred as a consequence of an acute injury. Instability with recurrent dislocations due to
congenital laxity may reasonably be rehabilitated first, prior to consideration of surgery.
Benefits
Reduced probability of dislocation and lessened symptoms of instability. Also provides an
opportunity to treat other accompanying problems such as rotator cuff tear or labral tear.
Harms
Surgical complications, inadequate repair such that there are ongoing dislocations,
infection, adhesive capsulitis
Rationale
Once the shoulder dislocates due to trauma, the disrupted joint capsule is lax and prone to
re-dislocation. Thus, surgery after a first dislocation is reasonable, although an estimated
47% will not re-dislocate after an initial dislocation and treatment with exercise (Olds et al.,
2015). There is evidence that open Bankart repair results in somewhat lower recurrence and
reoperation rates than arthroscopic Bankart repairs; however the range of motion is better
after arthroscopic repair (Jorgensen et al., 1999, Sperber et al., 2001, Grasso et al., 2009,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

460

Bottoni et al., 2006, Bottoni et al., 2021, Rhee et al., 2007, Archetti Netto et al., 2012,
Mohtadi et al., 2014, Chen, 2015, Olds et al., 2015)
Regardless of the surgical approach used, surgery has been shown to reduce the probability
of dislocation and symptoms of instability compared with non-operative management
(Kirkley et al., 1999, Kirkley et al., 2005, Edmonds et al., 2003, Bottoni et al., 2002, Jakobsen
et al., 2007, Yapp et al., 2020, Minkus et al., 2021, Pougès et al., 2021). One trial found that
the benefit persisted and continued to grow after up to 10 years of follow-up (Yapp et al.,
2020). Additional information on certain techniques has been reported: addition of
electrothermal capsulorrhaphy has been found to be ineffective (McRae et al., 2016);
addition of infraspinatus remplissage to arthroscopic Bankart repair for anterior shoulder
instability with Hill-Sachs defects (MacDonald et al., 2021) has been found to decrease risk
of recurrent instability; and arthroscopic Bankart repair with curettage of the cartilage along
the anterior glenoid edge reduced dislocation recurrences (Desai et al., 2021). Bristow and
Latarjet techniques were comparable in high-demand athletes (Belangero et al., 2021).
Young patients typically have greater problems with recurrent dislocation and thus stronger
indications for surgery after a first dislocation.
The outcome of surgical treatment after dislocation is highly correlated with the extent of
glenoid bone loss and presence of engaging Hill-Sachs lesion (Wang, 2018, Flatow, 1998,
Armitage, 2010). The concept of on-track and off-track lesions describes the relationship of
the Hill-Sachs lesion and the glenoid. In on-track lesions, the Hills-Sachs lesion remains
within the glenoid normal zone of contact in the end range of motion. In off-track lesion, the
edge of the Hill-Sachs lesion translates more medially than the medial border of the glenoid
normal zone of contact (Gulati, 2017, Provencher, 2012). The on-track and off-track concept
has been shown to reliably predict surgical outcomes and recurrent instability (White,
2019). Glenoid bone loss of greater than 20% is major risk factor for failure of arthroscopic
Bankhart repair (Wang, 2018, Provencher, 2012). In case of glenoid bone loss greater than
20%, open versus arthroscopic glenoid bone grafting or coracoid sling bone grating
technique (example Latarjet procedure) should be considered (Boileau, 2012, Cowling,
2016, Allain, 1998). In case of off-track lesions, in addition to arthroscopic Bankhart repair,
Remplissage procedure to fill in the engaging Hill-Sachs lesion and bone grafting should be
utilized to reduce surgical failure and risk of recurrent dislocation (Garcia, 2016, Armitage,
2010).
Arthroscopy is invasive, has adverse effects, and is high cost. However, because repeat
dislocations are common and instability can be significantly impairing, surgery is
recommended as a treatment option.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

461

sources. Of the 44 articles considered for inclusion, 8 randomized trials and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
OPEN SURGERY FOR SHOULDER DISLOCATION AND INSTABILITY
Recommended
Open surgery or arthroscopy is recommended for evaluation and treatment of patients with
dislocation and instability.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Shoulder dislocation or instability, including after a first traumatic dislocation. There is no
requirement to have rehabilitation prior to surgery if there is a dislocation which has
occurred as a consequence of an acute injury. Instability with recurrent dislocations due to
congenital laxity may reasonably be rehabilitated first, prior to consideration of surgery.
Benefits
Reduced probability of dislocation and lessened symptoms of instability. Also provides an
opportunity to treat other accompanying problems such as rotator cuff tear or labral tear.
Harms
Surgical complications, inadequate repair such that there are ongoing dislocations,
infection, adhesive capsulitis.
Rationale
Once the shoulder dislocates due to trauma, the disrupted joint capsule is lax and prone to
re-dislocation; thus, surgery after a first dislocation is reasonable. There is evidence that
open Bankart repair results in somewhat lower recurrence and reoperation rates than
arthroscopic Bankart repairs; however the range of motion is better after arthroscopic
repair (Jorgensen et al., 1999, Sperber et al., 2001, Grasso et al., 2009, Bottoni et al., 2006,
Bottoni et al., 2021, Rhee et al., 2007, Archetti Netto et al., 2012, Mohtadi et al., 2014,
Chen, 2015, Olds et al., 2015).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

462

Surgery has been shown to reduce the probability of dislocation and symptoms of
instability. Young patients typically have greater problems with recurrent dislocation and
thus stronger indications for surgery after a first dislocation. Surgery is invasive, has adverse
effects and is high cost. However, as repeat dislocations are common and instability can be
significantly impairing, surgery is recommended as a treatment option.
A meta-analysis comparing transglenoid sutures with bioabsorbable tacks found a higher
rate of recurrent dislocation (12.6 versus 3.4%); however, it largely relied on case series
(Freedman et al., 2004). An experimental cadaveric study evaluated capsular plication
versus anchor repair (Provencher et al., 2008). There is insufficient evidence to recommend
for or against specific intraoperative techniques.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 44 articles considered for inclusion, 5 randomized trials and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SURGERY FOR MULTIDIRECTIONAL INSTABILITY
Recommended
Inferior capsular shift procedure, capsular plication, or superior shift of redundant inferior
capsule is recommended for multidirectional and posterior instability.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Recurrent, multidirectional shoulder instability or dislocation.
Benefits

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

463

Reduced probability of dislocation and lessened symptoms of instability. Also provides an
opportunity to treat other accompanying problems such as rotator cuff tear or labral tear.
Harms
Surgical complications, inadequate repair such that there are ongoing dislocations,
infection, adhesive capsulitis.
Rationale
There are no quality studies evaluating treatment of multidirectional and posterior
instability and no randomized comparative trials of available operative approaches. Surgical
results in case series have suggested some benefits (Neer et al., 1980, Tibone et al., 1990,
Duncan et al., 1993, Pollock et al., 1993, Tibone et al., 1993, McIntyre et al., 1996, Wolf et
al., 1998, Hamada et al., 1999, Treacy et al., 1999, Antoniou et al., 2000). A systematic
review including non-randomized studies suggested that capsular plication and capsular
shift are associated with better results (Longo et al., 2013). Currently, arthroscopic capsular
placation is replacing open capsular shifts.
Surgery is invasive, has adverse effects, and is high cost. However, for some patients there is
no other reasonable alternative for treatment; thus, surgery is recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 44 articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ARTHROSCOPIC LAVAGE FOR SHOULDER DISLOCATIONS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the isolated use of arthroscopic lavage for
shoulder dislocations. Lavage may be a normal part of a treatment procedure, e.g., included
with arthroscopy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

464

Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are three moderate-quality trials with four reports all suggesting arthroscopic lavage
reduces risk of subsequent dislocation (Wintzell et al., 1999, Wintzell et al., 1999, Wintzell et
al., 2000, Wintzell et al., 1996). However, there are no quality trials available evaluating a
less-invasive procedure. Arthroscopic lavage as an isolated procedure is invasive, has
adverse effects, is costly, is less invasive than surgical repair, but does not achieve repair of
damaged tissue and there is no recommendation for or against arthroscopic lavage alone.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 44 articles considered for inclusion, 22 randomized trials and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

REHABILITATION PROGRAMS
ACCELERATED REHABILITATION FOR PATIENTS AFTER ARTHROSCOPIC BANKART REPAIRS
Recommended
Accelerated rehabilitation (compared with standard rehabilitation) is recommended for
select patients after arthroscopic Bankart repairs.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Arthroscopic Bankart repairs for traumatic anterior instability in select, particularly younger
patients.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

465

Benefits
Earlier recovery.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Two to 3 appointments a week for 3 weeks, then twice a week for 2 weeks and once weekly
to every other week for 6 to 9 additional weeks (Kim et al., 2003). Exact regimen requires
individualization; however, the accelerated rehabilitation regimen has been successful and
is generally recommended. Additional appointments should be based on documentation of
ongoing, incremental functional gains.
Indications for discontinuation
Recovery, reaching a plateau, noncompliance, intolerance.
Rationale
There is one moderate-quality study comparing traditional with accelerated rehabilitation of
patients (mean age 29) years, having undergone arthroscopic Bankart repairs for traumatic
recurrent anterior instability (Kim et al., 2003). The trial documented multiple advantages of
accelerated rehabilitation including greater satisfaction, lower pain scores, and faster
recovery. The dislocation rate was not increased by early rehabilitation during the study
period (range 27 to 45 months). Caution should be used as excessive early range of motion
in first 6 weeks will over stretch repair. Accelerated rehabilitation for other post-operative
patients with shoulder instability may speed return of function; however, similar cautions
exist (Wintzell et al., 1999, Wintzell et al., 1999, Wintzell et al., 2000, Wintzell et al., 1996).
Early rehabilitation is not invasive, appears to result in lower risks of adverse effects, is likely
less costly, and thus is recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 44 articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

466

reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
REHABILITATION FOR POST-OPERATIVE SHOULDER INSTABILITY PATIENTS
Recommended
Rehabilitation is recommended for patients undergoing surgery for shoulder instability who
do not undergo an accelerated rehabilitation program.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Patients undergoing surgery for shoulder instability or dislocation not addressed above.
Benefits
Recovery, regaining normal function.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Two to 3 appointments a week for 3 weeks, then 2 a week for 2 weeks, and once a week to
every other week for 6 additional weeks. Additional sets of appointments would need to be
based on documentation of ongoing, incremental functional gains.
Indications for discontinuation
Recovery, plateau in recovery, noncompliance, intolerance.
Rationale
There are many different post-operative rehabilitation regimens reported in quality surgery
trials and elsewhere to treat patients with shoulder instability (Kirkley et al., 1999,
McDermott et al., 1999, Sperber et al., 2001, Bottoni et al., 2002, Fabbriciani et al., 2004,
Kirkley et al., 2005, Jakobsen, 2007, Monteiro et al., 2008). However, there are scant quality
studies reported that evaluate these different regimens to help define superior treatment
programs. A phone assistance program to help encourage compliance was also reported as
successful (Martinez-Rico et al., 2018). Individualization of programs based on various
factors, including age, conditioning, and immediate post-surgical results, is needed (O'Brien

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

467

et al., 2002, O'Brien et al., 1987). Regardless of these weaknesses, postoperative
rehabilitation is recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 44 articles considered for inclusion, 4 randomized trials and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

FOLLOW-UP VISITS
Generally, patients with instability require few follow-up appointments unless undergoing
active treatment(s). Patients with dislocation generally require periodic appointments to
follow the clinical course. Appointment frequency may be greater if workplace limitations
are required and job demands are greater. Post-operative rehabilitation can be lengthy,
particularly in older patients with associated injuries such as those of the rotator cuff. In
those cases, therapy may be required on a prolonged basis for the patient to recover as
much function as possible.

LABRAL TEARS, INCLUDING SUPERIOR LABRAL ANTERIOR POSTERIOR (SLAP)
TEARS
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The following section contains recommendations for evaluating and managing labral tears
from the Evidence-Based Shoulder Disorders Panel. These recommendations are based on
critically appraised higher-quality research evidence or, when such evidence was
unavailable or inconsistent, on expert consensus as required in ACOEM’s Methodology.
Recommendations are made under the following categories:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Strongly Recommended, “A” Level
Moderately Recommended, “B” Level
Recommended, “C” Level
Insufficient – Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – No Recommendation (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – Not Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Not Recommended, “C” Level

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

468

●
●

Moderately Not Recommended, “B” Level
Strongly Not Recommended, “A” Level

OVERVIEW
Labral tear management is complex. Appropriate management begins with the anatomy,
pathophysiology, epidemiology, and clinical correlation of pathology with symptoms and
shoulder dysfunction. Labral tears are more prevalent with advancing age; thus, in patients
older than 40 years, they commonly represent a natural degenerative process in the
shoulder not unlike meniscal pathology in the knee. Most SLAP tears in patients over age 40
years do not require repair (1401,1996-2006).
Superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) and other labral tears have been clinically
recognized (461,2001,2007-2009). Labral tears can be considered in conjunction with dislocation
and instability for anatomic reasons. In certain cases, SLAP tears may occur with acute
traumatic dislocations (2010), but are most commonly associated with other trauma and
disorders such as rotator cuff tendinopathies and acromioclavicular disorders (1401,19961998,2000-2006)
.
Superior labral tears are either the result of acute traumatic injury or chronic degenerative
pathology. The most common mechanism of acute injury reported is a compressive force on
shoulder or a subluxation injury, such as from a fall on an outstretched arm
(208,1998,2001,2003,2008,2011-2013)
or overhead athletic or comparable traction injuries (2014).
Nevertheless, overhead athletes (e.g., baseball, tennis, handball, badminton, softball,
swimming, volleyball, and squash) with SLAP tears seem to not do as well after arthroscopic
surgery compared to nonthrowing athletes (2015). SLAP tears in the younger, athletic
throwers and overhead athletes are dissimilar from the general population and appear to
require different considerations. Extrapolation of management of throwing athletes to the
general population is inappropriate and has likely led to over-treatment of SLAP tears.
Labral tears occurring in older population are most commonly associated with other largely
degenerative conditions and thus might have relationships to underlying degenerative
conditions and not require repair (208,1996-2006). For the purposes of this guideline, these tears
are considered distinct from the acute traumatic labral tears that can occur with
dislocations. Initial patient management is generally non-operative (2005,2016) Surgery has
been utilized for patients who fail non-operative treatment and may be considered in active,
younger patients (2005).
The presence of a labral tear does not in, and of itself necessitate surgery. Labral tears are
often identified at surgery concurrently with other pathology such as rotator cuff tears,
acromial spurring, and glenohumeral arthritis. In many of these cases, especially with
advancing age, the labral tear may be irrelevant to the patient’s condition and not require
specific treatment. For example, if a patient’s clinical evaluation is consistent with rotator
cuff tear, an incidental labral tear does not need surgical repair (except perhaps in younger
patients) and if it is surgically treated, there is a greater chance that the patient will have
post-operative stiffness. Though there are no RCTs comparing repair of rotator cuff tears
with versus without surgical repair or debridement of labral tears, literature suggests there
are no advantages to repairing Type II lesions associated with rotator cuff tears in patients
over age 50 (2017).
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

469

Indications for surgery for SLAP tears are not standardized and remain somewhat
controversial. Expert opinion, including that of the American Academy of Orthopedic
Surgeons, recommends initial conservative care management for SLAP tears. In general,
conservative care management should generally last a minimum of 6 weeks. Early surgery
should only be considered in cases where there is evidence of suprascapular nerve
compression. The evidence for or against repairing SLAP tears over age 40 is mixed with no
high- or moderate-quality studies (2018). Evidence suggests no improvement with SLAP repair
at the time of rotator cuff repair and trends towards worse stiffness with simultaneous
surgical repairs (2019). For many years, rotator cuff tears were repaired without ever seeing
the inside of the glenohumeral joint (labral pathology was not surgically repaired), and the
patients had apparently equivalent outcomes.

DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
There are no consensus diagnostic criteria for labral tears; the diagnosis has been described
as difficult and nonspecific (2005,2012,2020-2023). Symptoms generally include non-radiating
shoulder joint pain, increased pain with overhead activity, and painful catching or popping
sensations (2008,2024,2025). Typical physical examination maneuvers are thought to be mostly
nonspecific (2003,2005,2011,2026). Other maneuvers have been developed (146,149,214,2027). One
study suggested 100% sensitivity and 99. 3% specificity of the Porcellini test for detection of
posterior labral tears (2028). A comparative study found the most sensitive maneuvers to be
active compression (65. 2%), Hawkin’s (65. 2%) and Speed’s (47. 8%). These relatively low
sensitivity values suggest that these tests will perform poorly except in high pre-test
probability circumstances. This suggests clinical suspicion and confirmatory imaging or
arthroscopy appear to be the best diagnostic methods (2005). The most commonly used
classification system is based on the initial large case series by (2001), although additions have
been made by several authors (208,2011,2025); however, it has been suggested to be unduly
complex. The primary issues are proposed to be instability of the biceps tendon anchor or
glenohumeral ligaments which then dictate operative approaches of repair of
capsuloligamentous structures back to the bony glenoid rim or biceps tenodesis (2005) (see
Table 7).
Table 7. Classification of Superior Labrum Anterior and Posterior (SLAP) Lesions

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

470

Adapted from (2008,2011,2025)

WORK LIMITATIONS
Patients with acute significant labral tears may be able to return to occupational activities.
However, limitations are generally required to avoid symptomatic aggravation typically
among those performing more physically demanding work. Limitations may include no
overhead use, no lifting more than 15 pounds, no repeated forceful use, and avoidance of
other activities that significantly increase symptoms. Limitations are gradually reduced as
recovery progresses. If surgery is performed, there is a similar need for workplace
limitations that are gradually reduced.

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
X-RAYS
X-rays show bony structures and are the initial tests for the evaluation of most cases of
shoulder pain (50,610).
X-RAYS FOR LABRAL TEARS
Recommended
X-rays are recommended for evaluation of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain
thought to be related to labral tear(s).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Most patients with shoulder pain are candidates for x-rays, especially for significant trauma,
pain without trending towards improvement, impaired use, and those with red flags.
Reportedly, x-ray has been helpful for diagnosing os acromiale in shoulder pain patients
who were otherwise thought to not have the condition (Burbank et al., 2008).
Benefits
Diagnosis of a fracture, calcific tendinitis, or otherwise latent medical condition(s).
Harms

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

471

Medicalization or worsening of otherwise benign shoulder condition; minor radiation
exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining x-rays once is generally sufficient with two to three views. For patients with
chronic shoulder pain, it may be reasonable to obtain a second set of x-rays later to reevaluate the patient’s condition, particularly if symptoms change.
Rationale
X-rays are helpful to evaluate most patients with shoulder pain, both to diagnose and to
assist with the differential diagnostic possibilities such as tendinoses and arthroses which
may accompany labral tears. X-rays are particularly helpful for diagnosis of calcific tendinitis,
which results in different treatment options. They may also help to suggest soft tissue
pathology, including large chronic rotator cuff tears.
Because x-ray has been performed for more than 120 years as a diagnostic procedure, it is
unsurprising that there is little quality evidence to support its use. The threshold for also
ordering x-rays of the cervical spine and/or elbow joint should be low, particularly if the
findings on shoulder x-ray are either normal or do not readily explain the degree of
abnormality. Patients with shoulder pain might show greater tuberosity osteopenia, cystic
degenerative changes, and spurring, thought to be a marker of chronicity of rotator cuff
tears. Glenohumeral arthrosis is also more likely if there is a full-thickness rotator cuff tear
(Gartsman et al., 1997). Plain radiographic findings are used to stage disease involvement in
osteonecrosis or humeral avascular necrosis. Early x-rays are usually normal or have less
distinct trabecular patterns since the living part of the bone does not image (Ficat, 1985,
Harreld et al., 2009). As the disease progresses, x-rays begin to show osteoporotic areas,
progressing to sclerotic areas and finally flattening and bony collapse (Ficat, 1985, Harreld et
al., 2009).
X-rays are non-invasive, low to moderately costly, have little risk of adverse effects, and
therefore are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

472

review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SHOULDER ARTHROSCOPY
Arthroscopy has been used for diagnosis and as part of a therapeutic surgical treatment
(79,624-628)
. See Surgical Considerations for more information.

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Computerized tomography remains an important imaging procedure, particularly for bony
anatomy, whereas MRI is superior for soft tissue abnormalities. However, most patients
have issues with soft tissue rather than bony abnormalities in the shoulder, thus on a
population basis, far fewer CT scans are ordered. CT may nevertheless be useful for
shoulder joint abnormalities where advanced imaging of the bones is required (i.e., complex
proximal humerus fracture, scapular fracture). CT also may be useful to evaluate the
anatomy in patients with contraindications for MRI (most typically an implanted metallicferrous device). CT arthrogram is often preferred when evaluating posterior or anterior
glenohumeral instability when the bony anatomy needs to be better defined – glenoid
deficiency and humeral Hill-Sachs – as MRI is not as good for bone imaging. CT arthrogram
can be used in place of MRI to evaluate for rotator cuff tear.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY FOR LABRAL TEARS
Not Recommended
Computed tomography (CT) is not recommended for the evaluation of labral tears.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Rationale
CT without arthrography is not indicated for evaluating labral tears, as arthrography is
needed and MRI is superior.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

473

reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
CT ARTHROGRAPHY FOR LABRAL TEARS
Sometimes Recommended
Computed tomography (CT) arthrography is recommended for the select evaluation of
labral tears.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Imaging for labral tears in which there are contraindications for MR Arthrography (e.g.,
ferrous implant). CT may be preferable if there also are concerns about complex proximal
humeral and glenoid/scapular fractures or other calcified structures. For most shoulder
conditions, MRI and MRA are superior for imaging soft tissues.
Benefits
Diagnosis and understanding of the degree of labral tearsn, as well as osseous abnormalities
such as complex fractures
Harms
Radiation exposure, pain of the procedure, infection
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining a CT arthrogram once is generally sufficient. For patients with chronic shoulder
pain, it may be reasonable to obtain a second CT later if symptoms substantially change.
Rationale
MR arthrography is considered superior to CT arthrography for imaging most labral tears, as
well as advanced imaging of soft tissues. However, where imaging calcified structures is
required, CT is considered superior. This includes complex proximal humeral and
glenoid/scapular fractures. CT arthrography is minimally invasive, has few, if any, adverse
effects but is costly. It is recommended for select use.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

474

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is often used as a secondary test after x-ray for many
shoulder joint problems since it tends to be helpful for imaging soft tissues, particularly the
rotator cuff.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING FOR LABRAL TEARS
Recommended
MRI without arthrography is selectively recommended for evaluation of some labral tears.
There are select indications for evaluating bony Bankart lesions or Hill-Sachs lesions. MRI
with angiography is preferrable for the evaluation of other potential labral tears.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Patients with subacute or chronic shoulder pain with symptoms, or clinical suspicion, of
labral tears. MRI may be reasonably successful in identifying tears compared with MRI plus
angiography when there is joint swelling, thus especially when there is accompanying acute
traumatic injury. Patients should generally have failed non-operative treatment including
NSAID and waiting 4 to 6 weeks without trending towards resolution. Among patients
lacking acute trauma (e.g., onset of mechanical joint symptoms without an accompanying
sports-like event such as acute dislocation or fall producing glenohumeral joint bleeding),
MRI with angiography is generally preferable.
Benefits
Secure a diagnosis.
Harms

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

475

False positives and false negatives for labral tears.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed, and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination. If a second study is felt to be needed, there is generally a need for
accompanying arthrography.
Rationale
A high-quality study of indirect MRA found 95-97% sensitivity for labral tears compared with
79-83% for MRI, while accuracy with MRA was 93-95% compared with 84-86% for MRI
(Fallahi, 2013). A study comparing MRI, MRA and US found MRA superior for evaluating
labral, capsular ligamentous complex lesions while MRI was more accurate for bony Bankart
lesions or Hill-Sachs lesions (Pavic et al., 2013). A comparative study found 95-97%
sensitivity of indirect MRA, which does not require articular injection, compared with 7983% sensitivity for MRI (Fallahi, 2013). One study found that adding MRA to MRI added little
if the MRI already demonstrated findings (Magee, 2015).
MRI without arthrography is selectively recommended not indicated for evaluating labral
tears, especially among patients with joint swelling and/or when there is accompanying
acute traumatic injury (e.g., among patients lacking acute trauma such as onset of
mechanical joint symptoms without an accompanying sports-like event such as acute
dislocation or fall producing glenohumeral joint bleeding). MRI with angiography is generally
preferable among patients having mechanical joint symptoms but without joint swelling as
MR arthrography has been consistently shown to be superior in multiple quality studies.
MRI may also be helpful for select use of evaluating bony Bankart lesions or Hill-Sachs
lesions.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Of the 21 articles considered for inclusion, 5 diagnostic studies and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

476

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE ARTHROGRAM
Magnetic resonance arthrography (MRA) combines an MRI with an arthrogram to overcome
MRI limitations and is usually performed in preference to CT arthrography unless bony
structure definition is needed as well (Hunter et al., 1992) (Palmer, 1997). MR arthrography
is particularly thought to be effective for imaging labral pathology (Monu et al., 1994)
(Bencardino et al., 2000) (Jee et al., 2001) (Peh, 2002) (Stetson et al., 2002) (Beall et al., 2003)
(Waldt et al., 2004) (Lin, 2009). MRA is thought to be effective for imaging superior labral
anterior posterior (SLAP) or other labral tears (Karzel et al., 1993) (Smith et al., 1993) (Monu
et al., 1994) (Bencardino et al., 2000) (Jee et al., 2001) (Peh, 2002) (Stetson et al., 2002) (Nam
et al., 2003) (Waldt et al., 2004) (Lin, 2009). MR arthrography combines MRI with an
arthrogram to identify both findings available with MRI, as well as the better capability to
define labral tears among patients with symptoms of labral injuries in the shoulder (Beall et
al., 2003).
MR ARTHROGRAM FOR LABRAL TEARS
Recommended
MR arthrography is recommended for diagnosing labral tears in patients with subacute or
chronic shoulder pain.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Patients with subacute or chronic shoulder pain with symptoms (or clinical suspicion) of
labral tears. Patients should generally have failed non-operative treatment including NSAID
and waiting 4 to 6 weeks without trending towards resolution.
Benefits
Secure a diagnosis.
Harms
False positives and false negatives for labral tears Arthrography improves the accuracy
especially regarding complete rotator cuff tears and significant labral tears. Small risk of
infection and complications from the injection.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed, and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

477

Rationale
A high-quality study of indirect MRA found 95-97% sensitivity for labral tears compared with
79-83% for MRI (Fallahi, 2013). A moderate-quality study found MRA had 93% sensitivity,
96% specificity, and 94% accuracy compared with arthroscopy (Saba et al., 2017). A study
comparing MRI, MRA, and US found MRA to be superior for evaluating labral, capsular
ligamentous complex lesions, while MRI was more accurate for bony Bankart lesions or HillSachs lesions (Pavic et al., 2013). Another study found that MRA was 60% sensitive for
anterior labral tears, 75% for SLAP tears, 57% for posterior tears, 87% for any labral tear,
and 91% for Hill-Sachs lesions compared with arthroscopy (Saqib et al., 2017). A
comparative study found 95-97% sensitivity of indirect MRA, which does not require
articular injection, compared with 79-83% sensitivity for MRI (Fallahi, 2013).

One comparative study found a combination of MRA and unenhanced MRI as superior to
MRA alone (Magee, 2015), and that adding MRA to MRI added little if the MRI already
demonstrated findings (Magee, 2016). A comparison of high- versus low-field MR imaging
for SLAP tears among symptomatic patients found high field superior for diagnosing SLAP
tears (Tung et al., 2000). The sensitivity of high field MRA was 90% and specificity 63%, while
sensitivity for low field was 64% and 70% specificity. MRA was found superior to CT
arthrography (CTA) and marginally better than MRI for identification of labral tears in a case
series of patients with recurrent anterior instability, prior anterior dislocation or shoulder
pain of unknown cause (Chandnani et al., 1993). MRA sensitivity for a labral tear was 96. 4%,
MRI was 92. 9%, and CTA was 73. 1%. Specificity was 100% for all three tests; however, this
appears overstated as there were only two patients without a tear in this small case series.
MR arthrography is invasive, has adverse effects (including a low, but definite, risk of
infection), and is painful. It is also costly, although MRA has been shown to provide better
cost effectiveness than MRI or CT arthrography for select diagnoses (Oh et al., 1999).
Consistent studies have shown MRA is the best imaging procedure available for patients
thought to have labral tears or patients with good strength in order to assess the labrum
and rotator cuff with traumatic injury simultaneously, and is thus recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Of the 21 articles considered for inclusion, 6 diagnostic studies and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

478

review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ULTRASOUND
Diagnostic ultrasound has been used for evaluating labral tears.
ULTRASOUND FOR LABRAL TEARS
Not Recommended
Ultrasound is not recommended for evaluation of labral tears.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
A study comparing MRI, MRA, and ultrasound (US) found MRA superior for evaluating labral,
capsular ligamentous complex lesions, while MRI was more accurate for bony Bankart
lesions or Hill-Sachs lesions (Pavic et al., 2013). A study assessing US for evaluation of
posterior labrocapsular structures suggested US may have limited indications when there
are contraindications for MRA (Ogul et al., 2020). A trial evaluating US after injection of
gadolinium for an MRA reported the injection helped detection of labral tears (Jeong, 2012).
Ultrasound has been compared with MR arthrography and is inferior in quality studies.
Thus, ultrasound is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Of the 21 articles considered for inclusion, 3 diagnostic studies and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

479

SINGLE-PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT)
SINGLE-PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY FOR LABRAL TEARS
Not Recommended
Single-proton emission computed tomography (SPECT) is not recommended for the
evaluation of patients with suspected labral tears.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain with suspected labral
tears, and they are not believed to provide significant additional information above more
standard imaging techniques. Thus, they are not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET)
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY FOR LABRAL TEARS
Not Recommended
Positron emission tomography (PET) is not recommended for the evaluation of patients with
suspected labral tears.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

480

There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain with suspected labral
tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

DIAGNOSTIC INJECTIONS
Diagnostic injections particularly of the subacromial space, glenohumeral joint and
acromioclavicular joint are sometimes performed. However, they are nearly always
performed in combination with a therapeutic intervention, such as a glucocorticosteroid
injection. Injection with a therapeutic agent is nearly always preferable due to less overall
invasiveness with 1 injection rather than 2, as well as the potential to assess the patient
both immediately post-injection for diagnostic purposes as well as longer term for
therapeutic purposes (see Injection Therapies).

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
INITIAL CARE
Initial care of a labral tear involves identification of other accompanying disorders, such as
rotator cuff tendinopathies, tears, and acromioclavicular joint issues, and treated
accordingly (2031). Over-the-counter (OTC) analgesics and self-applications of heat and ice
have been used to treat labral tears. Slings are generally not required, although they might
be reasonable for brief treatment of severe symptomatic tears, with use gradually weaned.
SELF-APPLICATION OF HEAT OR ICE FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
Recommended
Self-application of heat or ice is recommended for treatment of superior labral anterior
posterior (SLAP) or other labral tears.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

481

Level of confidence Low
Indications
Shoulder injuries with suspected labral tears (or other trauma or injuries).
Benefits
Self-management of the pain.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Ice and heat are typically used 3-5 times a day.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution of pain, lack of efficacy, intolerance, complication.
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating analgesics, ice or heat for managing labral tears. Selfapplications of heat and ice may be helpful for self-management of symptoms, are not
invasive, have low adverse effects, not costly, and are believed to be helpful for treating
symptoms; thus, they are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

482

SLINGS FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
Not Recommended
Slings are not recommended for treatment of labral tears other than in the setting of
significant trauma.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating slings for management of acute SLAP and other labral
tears. Slings are generally not needed for labral tears, and have risks of debility and adhesive
capsulitis. They may be reasonable for significant trauma or severe symptomatic tears, but
are not normally indicated for isolated labral tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MEDICATIONS
Over-the-counter medications may be helpful for pain associated with labral tears.
Generally, the only medications commonly used for labral tears are NSAIDs. Prescription
medications such as opioids (see Medications for Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy) for pain
management require judicious use and should only be considered in select, severe cases.
Patients may also require medications post-operatively.
There is no quality literature specific to shoulder labral tears for nearly all of the following
interventions. In the absence of quality evidence, it is recommended that labral tears be
managed according to the recommendations for Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy and Shoulder
Pain:

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

483

●
NSAIDs for Treatment of Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies and Shoulder Pain [Strongly
Recommended, Evidence (A)]
●
Acetaminophen for Acute, Subacute, Chronic, or Post-operative Shoulder Pain
[Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibiting Anti-depressants for Subacute or Chronic
Shoulder Girdle Pain [Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors for Acute, Subacute, or Chronic Shoulder
Pain and Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Anti-convulsants for Acute, Subacute or Chronic Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathies [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Capsicum Creams for Acute, Subacute, Chronic Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathy [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Topical NSAIDs, including Diclofenac Epolamine for Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathy [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Topical Glyceryl Trinitrate, Lidocaine Patches, Eutectic Mixture of Local Anesthetics
(EMLA), and Other Creams/Ointments for Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy
[Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
See also the ACOEM Opioids guideline for the treatment of subacute and chronic pain.

ALLIED HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
Self-applications of heat or cryotherapies may be helpful for symptom modulation and are
recommended to treat labral tears. Therapy including education and exercise is also
recommended. Acupuncture and other physical methods such as massage, diathermy, and
magnets have been used to treat shoulder pain that includes labral tears.
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN FROM LABRAL TEARS
Sometimes Recommended
Acupuncture is selectively recommended to control chronic pain associated with labral
tears.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Highly selected patients with chronic shoulder pain of 3+ months who have inadequate
relief and incapacity after multiple interventions including NSAIDs, a quality active exercise
program with which there has been compliance, and potentially surgical repair. Caution that
use may augment reliance on passive modalities instead of active, self-care treatment
strategies.
Benefits
Modest reduction in pain.
Harms
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

484

Rare needling of deep tissue, such as artery, lung, etc. and resultant complications. Use of
acupuncture may theoretically increase reliance on passive modality(ies) for chronic pain.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Frequency and duration pattern in the quality trial was weekly for 8 weeks for other
shoulder disorders. An initial trial of 4 appointments would appear reasonable in
combination with a conditioning program of aerobic and strengthening exercises. An
additional 4 appointments should be tied to improvements in objective measures after the
first 4 treatments, for a total of 8 (de Hoyos et al., 2004). If acupuncture is trialed in a
patient, objective functional improvement should be demonstrated after 4 visits.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution, intolerance, non-compliance including non-compliance with aerobic and
strengthening exercises, no functional gains demonstrated.
Rationale
The overall body of evidence for the use of acupuncture is relatively weak, and quite limited
for labral tears. The more general shoulder literature suggests some potential efficacy (see
Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy); thus, by inference, acupuncture is also recommended for
chronic shoulder pain related to labral tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
DIATHERMY FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
No Recommendation

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

485

There is no recommendation for or against the use of diathermy for the treatment of
superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) or other labral tears.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of diathermy
for treatment of shoulder labral tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
INFRARED THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of infrared therapy for the treatment of
superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) or other labral tears.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of infrared
therapy for treatment of shoulder labral tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

486

clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ULTRASOUND FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of ultrasound for the treatment of
superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) or other labral tears.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of ultrasound
for treatment of shoulder labral tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
LASER THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
No Recommendation
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

487

There is no recommendation for or against the use of laser therapy for the treatment of
superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) or other labral tears.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of laser
therapy for treatment of shoulder labral tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANUAL THERAPY OR MOBILIZATION FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of manual therapy or mobilization for
the treatment of superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) or other labral tears.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of manual
therapy or mobilization for treatment of shoulder labral tears.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

488

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANIPULATION FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of manipulation for the treatment of
superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) or other labral tears.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
manipulation for treatment of shoulder labral tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

489

MASSAGE FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of massage for the treatment of superior
labral anterior posterior (SLAP) or other labral tears.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of massage
for treatment of shoulder labral tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
HIGH-VOLTAGE GALVANIC THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of high-voltage galvanic therapy for the
treatment of superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) or other labral tears.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of highvoltage galvanic therapy for treatment of shoulder labral tears.
Evidence
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

490

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
H-WAVE® DEVICE STIMULATION FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of H-wave® Device Stimulation for the
treatment of superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) or other labral tears.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of H-wave®
Device Stimulation for treatment of shoulder labral tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

491

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
IONTOPHORESIS FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of iontophoresis for the treatment of
superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) or other labral tears.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
iontophoresis for treatment of shoulder labral tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MICROCURRENT STIMULATION FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of microcurrent stimulation for the
treatment of superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) or other labral tears.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
microcurrent stimulation for treatment of shoulder labral tears.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

492

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SYMPATHETIC ELECTROTHERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of sympathetic electrotherapy for the
treatment of superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) or other labral tears.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
sympathetic electrotherapy for treatment of shoulder labral tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

493

we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PERCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION (PENS) FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL
TEARS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of percutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (PENS) for the treatment of superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) or other
labral tears.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (PENS) for treatment of shoulder labral tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
TRANSCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION (TENS) FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL
TEARS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (TENS) for the treatment of superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) or other
labral tears.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

494

Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of TENS for
treatment of shoulder labral tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
TAPING FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
Not Recommended
Taping, magnets, pulsed electromagnetic frequency, and interferential therapy are not
recommended for the treatment of superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) or other labral
tears.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence of efficacy and there is evidence suggesting inefficacy for other
shoulder disorders, and thus taping is not recommended for treatment of labral tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

495

We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MAGNETS FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
Not Recommended
Magnets are not recommended for the treatment of superior labral anterior posterior
(SLAP) or other labral tears.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence of efficacy and there is evidence suggesting inefficacy for other
shoulder disorders, and thus magnets are not recommended for treatment of labral tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PULSED ELECTROMAGNETIC
FREQUENCY FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
Not Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

496

Pulsed electromagnetic frequency are not recommended for the treatment of superior
labral anterior posterior (SLAP) or other labral tears.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence of efficacy and there is evidence suggesting inefficacy for other
shoulder disorders, and thus pulsed electromagnetic frequency is not recommended for
treatment of labral tears.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
INTERFERENTIAL THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
Not Recommended
Interferential therapy is not recommended for the treatment of superior labral anterior
posterior (SLAP) or other labral tears.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence of efficacy and there is evidence suggesting inefficacy for other
shoulder disorders, and thus interferential therapy is not recommended for treatment of
labral tears.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

497

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

INJECTION THERAPIES
Injections are generally not indicated for labral and SLAP tears. However, they are
sometimes utilized to treat patients who have other conditions, such as rotator cuff
tendinopathies, or as an injection for combined diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. An
injection may also be selectively indicated for patients who have delayed recovery for
unclear reasons (see Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy Injections).
INJECTIONS FOR TREATMENT OF LABRAL TEARS
Sometimes Recommended
Injections are selectively recommended for the combined diagnosis and treatment of labral
tears. Subacromial glucocorticosteroid injections may also be selectively indicated for
patients who have delayed recovery for unclear reasons (see Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy
Injections). However, injections are generally not indicated for labral and SLAP tears.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
See Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies for more information.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

498

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Nonoperative treatment has been widely used for labral tears. Surgical repair will not
improve the clinical outcome if the labral tear is not the cause of the problem. When the
tear is the cause of the problem, then repair is usually the treatment of choice if the patient
does not improve with non-operative management. The rate of success is unclear as there
are no large population-based studies available, although some believe that patients who
engage in throwing motions have a worse prognosis (2033). A considerable proportion of
these cases do not resolve with non-operative treatment. Arthroscopic (2035-2045) and some
open techniques (2046) or combined approaches (2009) have been utilized for treatment. Some
include addressing other abnormalities such as ganglion cysts along with the surgical
approach (2037). Surgical approaches involving debridement alone or removal of the
SLAP/labral lesion have been mostly abandoned due to low success rates and high rates of
subsequent impairment and disability (1996,1997). Subsequent attempts at repair of the tears
(SLAP/labral lesion) have reported better results in case series than non repair approaches
(141,2002,2014,2047-2049)
. The risk for poor outcomes after surgery and rehabilitation has been
estimated at 32% (2050) and are thought to be worse in workers’ compensation patients (2051).
The following text is provided as introductory review of surgical options, with the
determination of the procedure and approach depended on surgeon preferences for the
patient’s presentation. The type of tear is believed to guide the most appropriate surgical
treatment (2005,2023,2052), although there is not complete agreement on the approaches. For
Snyder type I SLAP tears, debridement is most recommended (2005,2021,2032,2042), although
some have recommended no debridement as the fraying is believed to be normal (2024).
There are several different Snyder type II SLAP lesions that, along with other types of
unstable tears, have been recommended for repair with sutures or tacks (2008,2047-2048,2053).
Biceps tenodesis has also been reportedly successful for treatment of some but not all
Snyder Type II lesions, particularly in patients over 40 years old in whom repairing SLAP
tears is associated with increased post-operative stiffness (1997,2053,2055).
Snyder Type III lesions have been recommended for treatment with debridement involving
the bucket handle tear and attempted repair with larger labral tears (2005,2021,2042). Snyder
Type IV lesions have been recommended for biceps debridement if there is less than 40%
involvement and either repaired or tenodesed if greater than 30 to 50% involved
(2012,2035,2021,2056)
. Specific labral pathologies are associated with shoulder injury and
dysfunction. Some of these patients will need surgery to treat instability which will involve
labral repair. Labral debridement in these cases does not treat the instability. Some chronic
degenerative SLAP tears that can be correlated with the patient’s symptoms may require
repair for management.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

499

ARTHROSCOPIC AND/OR OPEN SURGERY FOR LABRAL TEARS
Sometimes Recommended
Arthroscopic or open surgery is selectively recommended for select treatment of labral or
superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) tears, especially Type III and Type IV.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Symptoms with MRA or MRI findings and clinical suspicion of labral or SLAP tear that do not
symptomatically resolve after a minimum of approximately 6 weeks of non-operative
treatment. MRA findings should generally be larger tears (e.g., Snyder Type III or IV). Most
individuals over age 40 do not appear to require surgical repair, although a minority who fail
to either resolve or trend towards resolution may need operative repair (Altchek et al.,
1992) (Cordasco et al., 1993) (Resch et al., 1993) (Payne, 1994) (Warner et al., 1994) (Snyder
et al., 1995) (Berg et al., 1998) (Segmuller et al., 1997) (Handelberg et al., 1998) (Morgan et
al., 1998) (Pearce et al., 2000) (Parentis et al., 2002) (Kim et al., 2003).
Benefits
Improvement in symptoms, especially with large tears.
Harms
Stiffness, reduced function, operative complications, adhesive capsulitis.
Rationale
There is one high-quality RCT showing that surgical repair of type II tears is not superior to
sham surgery (Schrøder et al., 2017), and there are no sick leave or return-to-work benefits
(Brox et al., 2020). There are no quality studies of larger, type III and IV tears. There are no
quality trials comparing non-operative with operative management of labral and SLAP tears.
The current low-quality evidence suggests results with surgical repair are superior to nonoperative management for larger tears. There is one quality trial among patients with SLAP
and rotator cuff tears that reported biceps tenotomy plus rotator cuff tear was superior to
repair of the SLAP (Franceschi et al., 2008); however, this trial is unable to address the
central issue of appropriateness of surgery and surgical indications. Thus, while surgery is
invasive, has adverse effects, and is high cost, surgical repair is selectively recommended for
patients whose larger labral tears are likely the cause of the clinical picture and do not
resolve or trend towards resolution over a minimum of 6-12 weeks.
The evidence for or against repairing larger SLAP tears over age 40 is mixed with no high- or
moderate-quality studies (Provencher et al., 2019). Evidence suggests no improvement with
SLAP repair at the time of rotator cuff repair and trends towards worse stiffness with
simultaneous surgical repairs (Alpert et al., 2010). For many years, rotator cuff tears were
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

500

repaired without ever seeing the inside of the glenohumeral joint (labral pathology was not
surgically repaired). The patients had equivalent outcomes to current reports.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled
clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Of the 21 articles considered for inclusion, 7 randomized trials and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

POSTOPERATIVE REHABILITATION
Many different rehabilitation protocols have been reported that address rehabilitation for
labral and SLAP tears. There is no single protocol that is deemed most appropriate for all
labral and SLAP tears. Individualization of programs based on various factors, including age,
conditioning, and immediate post-surgical results is needed.
One protocol involved immobilizer use for 3 weeks with passive forward elevation and full
elbow ROM. During weeks 4 to 6, ROM is increased up to 90 degrees of abduction and
flexion. After 6 weeks, full ROM is begun; with gradual strengthening, biceps contraction
begins. Overhead activities and strenuous biceps activity are avoided for 12 weeks. At 12 to
16 weeks, physical therapy is discontinued and normal activities resumed. Throwing does
not resume for 4 to 5 months with full return to overhead sports at 8 to 9 months (2025).
Another protocol used an immobilizer for 4 weeks with active/active-assisted to 40 degrees
of external rotation; 140 degrees of forward flexion and exercises of wrist, hand, and elbow
ROM; grip strengthening; isometric abduction; and internal/external rotation at side. Weeks
4 to 6 used increased ROM to full and exercises of wrist/hand ROM, grip strengthening,
Theraband for isometrics, prone extensions, and scapular stabilizing. In weeks 6 to 12,
patients progressed to full active ROM and exercises, advanced to weights, and began
upper-body ergometer. Weeks 12 to 6 months included full active motion without
discomfort and exercises of progression to work/sport, return to weight room at 3 months
and return to contact sports at 6 months (2042). However, another protocol utilized an
immobilizer for 7 to 10 days followed by gentle pendulum exercises and passive ROM and
isometric strengthening. Active-assisted exercises were added at 4 weeks with a goal of full
ROM at 6 to 8 weeks. Rotator cuff and periscapular strengthening with Theraband was
added at 6 weeks and progressive strengthening at 16 weeks with a goal for return to usual

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

501

activities at 4 to 6 months (2045). Individualization of programs based on various factors,
including age, conditioning, and immediate post-surgical results is needed.
REHABILITATION FOR PATIENTS AFTER ARTHROSCOPIC OR OPEN LABRAL TEAR REPAIRS
Recommended
Rehabilitation is recommended for patients after arthroscopic or open labral and superior
labral anterior posterior (SLAP) tear repairs.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Arthroscopic or open repairs of labral and SLAP tears.
Benefits
Improved recovery and function.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Two to 3 appointments per week for 3 weeks, then 2 per week for 2 weeks and once weekly
to every other week for 6 to 9 additional weeks (Kim et al., 2003). Exact regimen requires
individualization; however, regimens are provided for guidance as examples of published
protocols and are recommended. Results of the exercise prescription should be regularly
monitored and failure to progressively improve is an indication to either revisit the
differential diagnosis and/or seek a second opinion/consultation, particularly by the time
approximately 6-12 therapy appointments is reached.
Indications for discontinuation
Recovery, plateau in recovery, noncompliance, or intolerance.
Rationale
One moderate-quality RCT found no differences between a 12-month home based exercise
program and usual care (Multanen et al., 2020). There are no quality trials that address
rehabilitation for labral and SLAP tears. However, exercise appears necessary and education
with a home-exercise program appears to be required for nearly all patients. Rehabilitation
is not invasive, has low adverse effects, but is moderate to high cost; however, it seems
necessary and is thus recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder labral tear, SLAP; controlled

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

502

clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials,
random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,039 articles in PubMed, 13,800 in Google Scholar, and 2 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 4 from PubMed, 15 from Google Scholar, and 2 from other
sources. Of the 21 articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

FOLLOW-UP VISITS
Most patients with labral tears generally require a few follow-up appointments for purposes
of monitoring symptoms, advancing treatment, and gradually reducing limitations if the tear
is gradually resolving with non-operative care. Patients with slower resolution, need of
operative care, or with other accompanying disorders will require a considerably greater
number of appointments. Frequencies of appointments may also be greater if workplace
limitations are required and job demands are higher. Post-operative rehabilitation can be
extensive, particularly in older patients with other associated injuries such as rotator cuff
injuries. In those cases, there may be a requirement for therapy on a prolonged basis to
recover as much function as possible, until the achievement of objective evidence of a
plateau.

ACROMIOCLAVICULAR SPRAINS AND DISLOCATIONS
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The following section contains recommendations for evaluating and managing
acromioclavicular sprains and dislocations from the Evidence-Based Shoulder Disorders
Panel. These recommendations are based on critically appraised higher-quality research
evidence or, when such evidence was unavailable or inconsistent, on expert consensus as
required in ACOEM’s Methodology. Recommendations are made under the following
categories:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Strongly Recommended, “A” Level
Moderately Recommended, “B” Level
Recommended, “C” Level
Insufficient – Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – No Recommendation (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – Not Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Not Recommended, “C” Level
Moderately Not Recommended, “B” Level
Strongly Not Recommended, “A” Level

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

503

OVERVIEW
Acromioclavicular (AC) sprains and dislocations are common injuries, especially in contact
sports (2059,2060), but they can also occur in settings of automobile crashes, falls, and
accidents (2061,2062). Thus, they are occasionally work-related conditions. Long-term risks
include secondary rotator cuff tendinopathies, acromioclavicular instability, and
osteoarthrosis in 50% (2063).

DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
The most commonly used scale grades AC sprains and dislocations from I to VI (2064,2065,2066).
Grades I and II are managed non-operatively. Grade III includes severe dislocation of the AC
joint with elevation of the distal clavicle of at least 1 clavicular diameter on AP radiograph.
Grades IV to VI are believed to require surgery (2061,2062,2067).
Table 8. Acromioclavicular Joint Disruptions with Pathophysiology and Basic Treatment*

*Adapted from (2064,2065,2066,2068).

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
X-RAYS
X-rays are the initial test for evaluation of most cases of AC shoulder pain (50,610).
X-RAYS FOR ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINTS
Recommended
X-rays are recommended for evaluation of the AC joint.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

504

Indications
Most patients with shoulder trauma. Also for those with bony pain, abnormalities on exam
and/or those not responding to treatment as expected.
Benefits
Diagnosis of a fracture, calcific tendinitis, or otherwise latent medical condition(s).
Harms
Medicalization or worsening of otherwise benign shoulder condition; minor radiation
exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining x-rays once is generally sufficient. For patients with chronic AC/shoulder pain, it
may be reasonable to obtain a second set of x-rays later to re-evaluate the patient’s
condition, particularly if symptoms change.
Rationale
X-rays are helpful to evaluate most patients with shoulder pain, especially to assess
fractures in the setting of trauma. X-rays are helpful to also identify other bony
abnormalities and thus are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

505

BONE SCANS
Bone scans involve intravenous administration of Technetium Tc-99m, a radioactive tracer
medication that is preferentially concentrated in areas of metabolic activity (turnover) in
bone. The radioactivity is then detected by a large sensor and converted into skeletal
images showing areas of increased uptake. There are many causes for abnormal radioactive
uptake, thus positive bone scans are not highly specific. Bone scans have been used for
diagnosis of early osteonecrosis prior to findings on x-ray, among other uses. Bone scans are
generally not needed for AC joint problems unless there are other conditions and/or
symptoms present, such as osteonecrosis, symptoms elsewhere, and/or systemic disorders.

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Computed tomography (CT) remains an important imaging procedure, particularly for bony
anatomy, whereas magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is superior for soft tissue
abnormalities. However, most patients have issues with soft tissue rather than bony
abnormalities in the shoulder, thus on a population-basis, far fewer CT scans are ordered. CT
may nevertheless be useful for shoulder joint abnormalities where advanced imaging of the
bones is required (i.e., acromioclavicular fractures, complex proximal humerus fracture,
scapular fracture). CT also may be useful to evaluate the anatomy in patients with
contraindications for MRI (most typically an implanted metallic-ferrous device). CT
arthrogram is often preferred when evaluating posterior or anterior glenohumeral
instability when the bony anatomy needs to be better defined – glenoid deficiency and
humeral Hill-Sachs – as MRI is not as good for bone imaging. CT arthrogram can be used in
place of MRI to evaluate for rotator cuff tear.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY FOR EVALUATION OF ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT
Sometimes Recommended
Computed tomography is selectively recommended for evaluation of complex or unusual
fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Imaging for complex or unusual AC joint fractures and/or proximal humeral and
glenoid/scapular fractures or other calcified structures. For most shoulder conditions,
particularly for concerns about the rotator cuff, MRI is superior. CT is also indicated where
advanced imaging is indicated but there is a contraindication for MRI (e.g., ferrous/metal
implant). CT arthrogram is often preferred when evaluating posterior or anterior
glenohumeral instability when the bony anatomy needs to be better defined – glenoid
deficiency and humeral Hill-Sachs – as MRI is not as good for bone imaging.
Benefits
Diagnosis and understanding of the degree of complex fractures, calcific tendinitis.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

506

Harms
Radiation exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining a CT once is generally sufficient. For patients with chronic shoulder pain, it may be
reasonable to obtain a second CT later to re-evaluate the patient’s condition, particularly if
symptoms change.
Rationale
X-rays generally suffice for the vast majority of AC trauma. However, where there are
complex or unusual AC joint fractures and/or proximal humeral and glenoid/scapular
fractures or other calcified structure concerns, CT is recommended. MRI is considered
superior to CT for imaging most shoulder abnormalities where advanced imaging of soft
tissues is usually the primary concern, especially regarding rotator cuff tendinopathies. CT is
minimally invasive, has few, if any, adverse effects but is costly. It is recommended for select
use.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

CT ARTHROGRAPHY
Arthrography involves the injection of contrast into the joint. It was modified in the 1970s to
include injection of air (“double contrast”) (614). Arthrography under fluoroscopy in isolation
has now been almost entirely replaced by other procedures, including MRI and MR
arthrography, primarily due to its low sensitivity for full-thickness tears and essentially no
sensitivity for partial thickness tears (1896). Most arthrograms, including MR arthrogram and
CT arthrogram, are performed using fluoroscopy to localize the joint and inject the contrast
agent.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

507

CT arthrography is considered preferable to MR arthrography when bony structure
definition is needed as well (705,706). MR arthrography is more effective for imaging labral
pathology, but does not image the AC joint as well as CT (148,385,707-712).
CT ARTHROGRAM FOR EVALUATING THE ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT WHILE ALSO
DIAGNOSING LABRAL TEARS
Recommended
CT arthrography is recommended for concerns about AC joint injury with labral involvement
and contraindications for MRA.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Patients with subacute or chronic shoulder pain with symptoms of, or clinical suspicion of
labral tears. Patients should generally have failed non-operative treatment including NSAID
and waiting 4 to 6 weeks without trending towards resolution. MRA is generally preferable
to CTA for imaging soft tissues, unless there are contraindications for MRI.
Benefits
Secure a diagnosis.
Harms
False positives and false negatives for labral tears. Arthrography improves the accuracy
especially regarding complete rotator cuff tears and significant labral tears. Small risk of
infection and complications from the injection.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed, and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
MR arthrograms have not been evaluated in quality studies. Although studies are
heterogeneous, pooled estimates of the sensitivity for full-thickness tears is estimated at
95% with specificity 93% (Dinnes et al., 2003). There is a high prevalence of labral injury with
a first shoulder dislocation based on MR arthrography (MRA) (Antonio et al., 2007).
Arthrography with low-field MR was found to be equivalent to high-field in a series of 38
patients (Loew et al., 2000). A comparison of high- versus low-field MR imaging for SLAP
tears among symptomatic patients found high field superior for diagnosing SLAP (Tung et
al., 2000). The sensitivity of high field MRA was 90% and specificity 63%, while sensitivity for
low field was 64% and 70% specificity. MRA was found superior to CT arthrography (CTA)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

508

and marginally better than MRI for identification of labral tears in a case series of patients
with recurrent anterior instability, prior anterior dislocation or shoulder pain of unknown
cause (Chandnani et al., 1993). MRA sensitivity for a labral tear was 96. 4%, MRI was 92. 9%,
and CTA was 73. 1%. Specificity was 100% for all three tests; however, this appears
overstated as there were only two patients without a tear in this small case series. MR
arthrography is invasive, has adverse effects including a low, but definite risk of infection
and is painful. It is also costly, although MRA has been felt to provide better cost
effectiveness than MRI or CT arthrography for select diagnoses (Oh et al., 1999). It is likely
the best imaging procedure available for patients thought to have labral tears or patients
with good strength in order to assess the labrum and rotator cuff with traumatic injury
simultaneously, and is recommended for select use.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is often used as a secondary test after x-ray for many
shoulder joint problems since it tends to be helpful for imaging soft tissues, particularly the
rotator cuff (175,207,656-666).
MRI FOR DIAGNOSING ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT DISORDERS WHILE ALSO
DIAGNOSING LABRAL TEARS
Sometimes Recommended
MRI is selectively recommended for patients with AC joint problems who are also suspected
of having acute, clinically significant rotator cuff tears or other soft tissue concerns.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

509

Patients thought to need imaging who not only have AC joint problems but who also have
soft tissue concerns such as an acute, clinically significant rotator cuff tear. Patients with
only bony concerns but needing imaging are recommended to instead undergo CT scanning
which is superior for osseous imaging. Patients with concerns about AC joint pathology and
labral tears may be better evaluated with CT Arthrography, while those with primarily soft
tissue concerns accompanying a reasonably defined AC joint problem would be better
candidates for MRA.
Benefits
Secure a diagnosis and identify a second disorder.
Harms
False positives and false negatives for rotator cuff tears.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed, and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
There are no quality studies identifying the need of MRI imaging for AC joint problems. CT is
superior for osseous structure imaging, thus MRI use is limited to AC joint problems while
also having concerns for soft tissue abnormalities such as rotator cuff tendinopathy. If there
are concerns for labral involvement, concomitant arthrography (CT arthrography) may be
preferable.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

510

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE ARTHROGRAM
Magnetic resonance (MR) arthrography combines an MRI with an arthrogram to overcome
MRI limitations and is usually performed in preference to CT arthrography unless bony
structure definition is needed as well (705,706). MR arthrography is particularly thought to be
effective for imaging labral pathology (148,385,707-712).
MAGNETIC RESONANCE ARTHROGRAM FOR DIAGNOSING ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT
DISORDERS
Not Recommended
Magnetic resonance (MR) arthrography is not recommended for evaluating AC joint
problems. For concerns about AC joint injury with labral involvement, CT arthrography
would generally be preferable.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
MR arthrography is not recommended for evaluating AC joint problems. For concerns about
AC joint injury with labral involvement, CT arthrography would generally be preferable for
bony concerns. MRA may be indicated when there are less concerns for the AC joint, but
there are concerns about soft tissues.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

511

ULTRASOUND
ULTRASOUND FOR DIAGNOSING ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT DISORDERS
Not Recommended
Ultrasound is not recommended for evaluating AC joint problems.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Ultrasound is not recommended for evaluating AC joint problems. X-rays are preferable for
visualizing the bony structures involved.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SINGLE-PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT)
SINGLE-PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT) FOR
ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT DISORDERS
Not Recommended
SPECT is not recommended for the evaluation of patients with AC Joint disorders.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

512

There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain due to occupational
injuries including AC Joint disorders. One study found SPECT helpful in evaluating patients
with inflammatory arthropathies, particularly if there are concerns about the SI joints
(Hanly, 1993). Some data suggest SPECT may outperform bone scanning. Additional studies
are needed to determine if SPECT or PET adds something to the diagnosis, treatment and
outcomes beyond that obtained by a careful history, physical examination, plain x-rays, and
clinical impression before it can be recommended for evaluating shoulder disorders.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET)
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET) FOR ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT DISORDERS
Not Recommended
PET scanning is not recommended for the evaluation of patients with AC joint disorders.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain due to occupational
injuries including AC joint disorders. One study found SPECT helpful in evaluating patients
with inflammatory arthropathies, particularly if there are concerns about the SI joints
(Hanly, 1993). Some data suggest SPECT may outperform bone scanning. Additional studies
are needed to determine if SPECT or PET adds something to the diagnosis, treatment and
outcomes beyond that obtained by a careful history, physical examination, plain x-rays, and
clinical impression before it can be recommended for evaluating shoulder disorders.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

513

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

DIAGNOSTIC INJECTIONS
Diagnostic injections are sometimes performed, particularly in the subacromial space,
glenohumeral joint, and acromioclavicular joint. However, they are nearly always performed
in combination with a therapeutic intervention, such as a glucocorticosteroid injection.
Injection with a therapeutic agent is nearly always preferable because it is less invasive to
perform only a single injection; in addition, the patient can be assessed both immediately
post-injection for diagnostic purposes and over the longer term for therapeutic purposes.

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
INITIAL CARE
Initial care of an AC sprain or separation involves identification of the grade of injury, as well
as of other accompanying disorders such as fractures, rotator cuff tendinopathies, and
labral injuries, and treated accordingly (2062). Over-the-counter analgesics and selfapplications of ice and heat are recommended. Slings may be helpful acutely. Early range-ofmotion exercises are recommended.
SLINGS FOR TREATMENT OF ACROMIOCLAVICULAR SPRAINS OR DISLOCATIONS
Recommended
Slings are selectively recommended for treatment of acromioclavicular sprains or
dislocations.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

514

Acute severe AC sprains, particularly where the appliance is utilized as part of a plan to
briefly rest the shoulder and promptly, gradually increase activity level. Non-operative
patients are recommended to have an ROM exercise program instituted in nearly all
circumstances.
Benefits
Short-term improvement in pain. Equivalent clinical results to surgical management but
without risk of surgery (Society, 2015) (Joukainen et al., 2014) (Mah, 2017) (Murray et al.,
2018) (Windhamre et al., 2022).
Harms
Delayed recovery, development of adhesive capsulitis and debility.
Indications for discontinuation
Generally should be weaned off within 1-2 weeks.
Rationale
There are no quality studies comparing slings with other devices. There are many quality
trials comparing various operative techniques with non-operative management, with all
trials suggesting equivalent clinical recovery with non-operative management (Canadian
Orthopaedic Trauma Society, 2015) (Joukainen et al., 2014) (Mah, 2017) (Murray et al.,
2018) (Windhamre et al., 2022). Short-term use of slings and supports may help with shortterm pain reductions. However, they come with considerable increased risks of adhesive
capsulitis, delayed recovery and increased debility. Thus, slings and supports are selectively
recommended for only shoulder severe pain and short-term use after surgery and acute
severe pain. Range of motion exercises are generally advised (e.g., pendulum, wall-walks)
during the time when using the sling. Generally wean of the support use within 1-2 weeks.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

515

we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MEDICATIONS
Over-the-counter (OTC) medications, particularly NSAIDs, may be helpful for pain
management and provide sufficient relieve for many Grade I and II AC sprains (2062,2067,2068).
Select patients may require judicious use of opioids for pain management. Patients may also
require medications post-operatively.
There is no quality literature specific to AC joint disorders for nearly all of the following
interventions. In the absence of quality evidence, it is recommended that AC joint disorders
be managed according to the recommendations for Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy and
Shoulder Pain:
●
NSAIDs for Treatment of Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies and Shoulder Pain [Strongly
Recommended, Evidence (A)]
●
Acetaminophen for Acute, Subacute, Chronic, or Post-operative Shoulder Pain
[Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibiting Anti-depressants for Subacute or Chronic
Shoulder Girdle Pain [Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors for Acute, Subacute, or Chronic Shoulder
Pain and Rotator Cuff Tendinopathies [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Anti-convulsants for Acute, Subacute or Chronic Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathies [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Capsicum Creams for Acute, Subacute, Chronic Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathy [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Topical NSAIDs, including Diclofenac Epolamine for Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathy [Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
●
Topical Glyceryl Trinitrate, Lidocaine Patches, Eutectic Mixture of Local Anesthetics
(EMLA), and Other Creams/Ointments for Shoulder Pain and Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy
[Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)]
See also the ACOEM Opioids guideline for the treatment of subacute and chronic pain.

ACTIVITY MODIFICATION AND EXERCISE
THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF SEVERE ACROMIOCLAVICULAR SPRAINS OR DISLOCATIONS
Recommended
Therapy, including exercises and education, is recommended for patients with moderate to
severe acromioclavicular sprains, or dislocations, or who are in need of surgery.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

516

Acromioclavicular sprains and separations, as well as post-operative use (Nuber et al., 1997,
Lemos, 1998).
Benefits
Earlier recovery of function.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Pendulum exercises are generally initiated, along with other ROM exercises and education.
These are typically followed by isometric strengthening program, then isotonic
strengthening and endurance exercises. Programs require individualization based on factors
such as patient’s injury severity, age, experience, comorbid conditions, and compliance. A
range of options includes weekly appointments to oversee and advance a home exercise
program for several weeks until sufficiently recovered for lower grade injuries and selfmotivated patients. Patients with more severe injuries or need for supervision may require
appointments 2 to 3 a week to initiate program exercises, tapering to 1 a week in
approximately 4 weeks before being discharged to a home-exercise program in
approximately 2 months for more severe injuries. Results of the exercise prescription should
be regularly monitored and failure to progressively improve is an indication to either revisit
the differential diagnosis and/or seek a second opinion/consultation, particularly by the
time approximately 6-12 therapy appointments is reached.
Indications for discontinuation
Recovery of function, resolution of pain, non-compliance.
Rationale
Education is often helpful for patient understanding of the condition and to facilitate
exercises, especially in the post-operative period.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder dislocation, shoulder instability;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 5,125 articles in PubMed, 106,000 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 28 from PubMed, 16 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 44 articles considered for inclusion, 4 randomized trials and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

517

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

INJECTION THERAPIES
Injections are generally not indicated for AC sprains and separations. However, they are
sometimes utilized for treatment of patients who have other conditions such as rotator cuff
tendinopathies or who have an injection for combined diagnostic and therapeutic purposes.
An injection may be indicated for patients who have delayed recovery for unclear reasons in
whom an empiric injection for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes is performed (see
Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy Injections). An injection is recommended prior to consideration
of distal clavicle resection for patients with ongoing pain of at least 6 months to ascertain
whether the injection will resolve the pain; then if the pain recurs after an injection, this
may help ascertain whether distal clavicle resection may be successful. An AC joint injection
is also potentially indicated for a patient with ongoing pain for at least 3 months after injury
and lack of resolution or improvement with NSAIDs and exercise.
For intraarticular shoulder viscosupplementation injections, see Knee Osteoarthrosis for
most relevant literature that is used under the assumption of physiological similarity.
GLUCOCORTICOSTEROID INJECTIONS FOR ACUTE TREATMENT OF ACROMIOCLAVICULAR
SPRAINS OR DISLOCATIONS
Not Recommended
Glucocorticosteroid injections are not recommended for the treatment of acute isolated
acromioclavicular sprains or dislocations.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and no sound rationale for injections for acute AC sprains to
alter and improve on the naturally good prognosis for these problems and thus they are not
recommended. Steroid injections may be indicated for short-term relief of arthritis (see
Osteoarthrosis).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

518

randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
GLUCOCORTICOSTEROID INJECTIONS FOR CHRONIC ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT PAIN
Recommended
A glucocorticosteroid injection is selectively recommended prior to consideration of distal
clavicle resection for patients with ongoing pain of at least 6 to 12 months to ascertain
whether the injection will resolve the pain. If an injection resolves the pain and the pain
recurs, then it helps define that distal clavicle resection may be more likely to be successful
provided there is no acromioclavicular instability.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Patients with ongoing pain of at least 6 to 12 months and for whom surgery is considered.
Benefits
Improvement or resolution of pain, clarification of the pain source, improved predictability
of surgical success.
Harms
Rare infection.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Dose is unclear as there are no controlled trials evaluating dosage. Simultaneous
administration of a local anesthetic with a glucocorticosteroid is highly recommended to
ascertain whether there is immediate relief on injection.
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

519

There are no quality trials. An injection is recommended prior to consideration of distal
clavicle resection for patients with ongoing pain of at least 6 months to ascertain whether
the injection will resolve the pain; if an injection then resolves the pain and the pain recurs,
it may suggest that to suggest whether distal clavicle resection may be successful and
should be recommended for grade I or II acromioclavicular dislocations. An AC joint injection
is also potentially indicated for a patient with ongoing pain for at least 3 months after injury
and lack of resolution or improvement with NSAIDs and exercise.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ALLIED HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
TAPING FOR TREATMENT OF ACROMIOCLAVICULAR SPRAINS OR DISLOCATIONS
Not Recommended
Taping is not recommended for the treatment of acromioclavicular sprains or dislocations.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Taping has been evaluated in quality trials for other musculoskeletal disorders, including low
back pain, and was found to be ineffective. Thus, it is not recommended for treatment of
acromioclavicular sprains or dislocations.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

520

acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MAGNETS FOR TREATMENT OF ACROMIOCLAVICULAR SPRAINS OR DISLOCATIONS
Not Recommended
Magnets are not recommended for the treatment of acromioclavicular sprains or
dislocations.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Magnets have been evaluated in quality trials for other musculoskeletal disorders, including
low back pain, and was found to be ineffective. Thus, they are not recommended for
treatment of acromioclavicular sprains or dislocations.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

521

PULSED ELECTROMAGNETIC FREQUENCY FOR TREATMENT OF ACROMIOCLAVICULAR
SPRAINS OR DISLOCATIONS
Not Recommended
Pulsed electromagnetic frequency is not recommended for the treatment of
acromioclavicular sprains or dislocations.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Pulsed electromagnetic frequency has been evaluated in quality trials for other
musculoskeletal disorders, including low back pain, and was found to be ineffective. Thus, it
is not recommended for treatment of acromioclavicular sprains or dislocations.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
INTERFERENTIAL THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF ACROMIOCLAVICULAR SPRAINS OR
DISLOCATIONS
Not Recommended
Interferential therapy is not recommended for the treatment of acromioclavicular sprains or
dislocations.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

522

Interferential therapy has been evaluated in quality trials for other musculoskeletal
disorders, including low back pain, and was found to be ineffective. Thus, it is not
recommended for treatment of acromioclavicular sprains or dislocations.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
OTHER PHYSICAL MODALITIES FOR TREATMENT OF ACROMIOCLAVICULAR SPRAINS OR
DISLOCATIONS
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of diathermy, infrared therapy,
ultrasound, laser therapy, manual therapy, mobilization, manipulation, massage, highvoltage galvanic, H-Wave® device stimulation, iontophoresis, microcurrent, percutaneous
electrical nerve stimulation (PENS), sympathetic electrotherapy, or transcutaneous electrical
stimulation (TENS) for treatment of acromioclavicular sprains or dislocations.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies and the clinical benefit remains uncertain. Thus there is no
recommendation for or against the use of diathermy, infrared therapy, ultrasound, laser
therapy, manual therapy, mobilization, manipulation, massage, high-voltage galvanic, Hwave stimulation, iontophoresis, microcurrent, percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
(PENS), sympathetic electrotherapy, or transcutaneous electrical stimulation (TENS) for
treatment of acromioclavicular sprains or dislocations.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

523

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Grade I and II AC sprains are managed non-operatively (2062,2069-2073). Patients with AC joint
separation managed non-operatively should anticipate pain for approximately 3 weeks, with
pain gradually decreasing. If pain persists after recovery and return to activities, resection of
the outer clavicle may be indicated after 6 months to 1 year, although local cortisone
injection(s) should generally be attempted. The initial deformity may decrease as healing
and scar contracture takes place. Persistence of the deformity is not an indication for
surgery. In one series, 79% of patients with moderate-to-severe AC separations had goodto-excellent late results with non-operative treatment; of the remainder, 90% had good-toexcellent results with simple excision of the outer clavicle.
Grade III separations have been managed both surgically and non-operatively; however,
multiple reviews have opined the evidence fails to clearly support a need for surgery and
some outcomes were better in the non-operatively treated patients (2069-2076), other than
potentially improved appearance (2071,2074,2077). Late symptoms, without surgery, include
popping (sometimes painful), clicking, painful AC joint, and arthrosis.
Grades IV to VI have been mostly managed surgically (2078), although some are managed
non-operatively. Surgical approaches include acromioclavicular reduction, coracoclavicular
ligament repair, coracoclavicular screw fixation, cerclage wire, autologous tissue
coracoclavicular ligament reconstruction, acromioclavicular ligament reconstruction, and
hook plates (1408,2062,2065,2071-2101). However, there are no quality trials to define an optimal
surgical approach or procedure. The AC joint has a fibrocartilaginous disk that exists but
degenerates and involutes with age (2102), although it is frequently removed from injured
joints of younger patients.
NON-OPERATIVE MANAGEMENT OF ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT SPRAIN – GRADES I TO II
Recommended
Non-operative management is recommended as the initial treatment for patients with
Grade I to II acromioclavicular joint sprains.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

524

Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Grade I to II acromioclavicular joint sprains.
Benefits
Earlier recovery of function.
Harms
Negligible.
Rationale
There are no quality trials comparing surgical with non-operative management of Grades I
to II acromioclavicular joint separations. The former are believed to be satisfactorily
addressed conservatively with excellent results and the latter are thought to be an
indication for surgical treatment. As there is no quality evidence of efficacy of surgery and
non-operative management is often successful, non-operative management is
recommended for at least 6 months.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 36 articles considered for inclusion, 5
randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SURGICAL GRAFTING FOR ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT SEPARATION
No Recommendation

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

525

There is no recommendation for or against surgical grafting for acromioclavicular joint
separations.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are two small studies, one of which may have a randomization failure, resulting in a
sparse database from which to draw meaningful conclusions. Thus, there is no
recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 36 articles considered for inclusion, 2
randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ROUTINE SURGICAL REPAIR OF ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT SEPARATION – GRADE III
Not Recommended
Routine surgical repair is moderately not recommended for Grade III acromioclavicular joint
separations (Larsen et al., 1986, Bannister et al., 1989).
Strength of evidence Moderately Not Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
There are multiple moderate-quality trials comparing non-operative with operative
management of Grade III AC separations (Larsen et al., 1986, Bannister et al., 1989,
Joukainen et al., 2014, Society, 2007, Mah, 2017, Murray et al., 2018, Windhamre et al.,
2022), with a few trials including Rockwood Type IV (Society, 2007, Mah, 2017, Murray et

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

526

al., 2018) and a couple including Rockwood Type V (Canadian Orthopaedic Trauma Society,
2007, Mah, 2017, Windhamre et al., 2022). Studies consistently report equivalent clinical
results but faster recovery and earlier return to work and sports. Yet, surgical treatment is
associated with higher complications in the operatively managed group (Bannister et al.,
1989), and multiple other case series document complications in surgically managed
patients. Surgery is invasive, has adverse effects, and is high cost. It is not recommended for
the vast majority of Grade III AC separations. However, there may be patients with either
particularly severe separations or with high physical demands who may potentially benefit
from such an intervention. Thus, there is a separate recommendation for consideration of
surgery for those selected patient groups.

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 36 articles considered for inclusion, 15
randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SURGICAL REPAIR OF ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT SEPARATION FOR SELECT PATIENTS –
GRADE III
Sometimes Recommended
Surgical repair is recommended for highly select patients with Grade III acromioclavicular
joint separations.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Symptomatic Grade III acromioclavicular joint separation in patients with concerns about
cosmesis, or those with unusually high physical occupational or sports demands, particularly

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

527

if there are symptoms not trending towards resolution over at least a month (Larsen et al.,
1986).
Benefits
Theoretical potential for improved outcomes.
Harms
Surgical complications including infection.
Rationale
There are multiple moderate-quality trials comparing non-operative with operative
management of Grade III AC separations (Larsen et al., 1986, Bannister et al., 1989,
Joukainen et al., 2014, Society, 2007, Mah, 2017, Murray et al., 2018, Windhamre et al.,
2022), with a couple trials including Rockwood Type IV (Society, 2015, Mah, 2017, Murray et
al., 2018) and a couple including Rockwood Type V (Society, 2015, Mah, 2017, Windhamre
et al., 2022). Studies consistently report equivalent clinical results but faster recovery and
earlier return to work and sports. Yet, surgical treatment is associated with higher
complications in the operatively managed group (Bannister et al., 1989), and multiple other
case series document complications in surgically managed patients. Surgery is invasive, has
adverse effects, and is high cost. It is not recommended for the vast majority of Grade III AC
separations. However, there may be patients with either particularly severe separations or
with high physical demands who may theoretically benefit, thus there is a recommendation
for consideration of surgery for those highly select groups.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SURGICAL REPAIR OF ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT SEPARATION – GRADES IV TO VI

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

528

Recommended
Surgical repair is recommended for treatment of Grades IV to VI acromioclavicular joint
separation.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Symptomatic Grade IV to VI acromioclavicular joint separation.
Benefits
Theoretical potential for improved outcomes.
Harms
Surgical complications including infection.
Rationale
There are a few trials including Rockwood Type IV (Society, 2015, Mah, 2017, Murray et al.,
2018) and a couple including Rockwood Type V (Society, 2015, Mah, 2017, Windhamre et
al., 2022) suggesting non-operative management is an option. However, most of these have
been managed surgically (Yan et al., 2017). Surgical approaches include acromioclavicular
reduction, coracoclavicular ligament repair, coracoclavicular screw fixation, cerclage wire,
autologous tissue coracoclavicular ligament reconstruction, acromioclavicular ligament
reconstruction, and hook plates (Bosworth, 1941, Dewar et al., 1965, Norrell et al., 1965,
Allman, 1967, Weaver et al., 1972, Ejeskar, 1974, Katznelson et al., 1976, Sethi et al., 1976,
Bargren et al., 1978, Vainionpaa et al., 1981, Paavolainen et al., 1983, Vandekerckhove et
al., 1985, Eskola et al., 1987, Taft et al., 1987, Ho et al., 1988, Skjeldal et al., 1988, Bannister
et al., 1989, Ferris et al., 1989, Jalovaara et al., 1991, Morrison et al., 1995, Sim et al., 1995,
Levine et al., 1998, Phillips et al., 1998, Faraj et al., 2001, Jones et al., 2001, Boldin et al.,
2004, Stewart et al., 2004, Lafosse et al., 2005, LaPrade et al., 2005, Yoo et al., 2006, Wang
et al., 2008, Simovitch et al., 2009, Fauci et al., 2013, Darabos et al., 2015, Wang, 2021, Ye et
al., 2016, Xu et al., 2017, Cai, 2018, Müller et al., 2018, Shui et al., 2018, Yin et al., 2018,
Abdelrahman et al., 2019, Lu et al., 2016, Sun et al., 2019). There also are no quality trials to
define an optimal surgical approach or procedure for a given condition. The AC joint has a
fibrocartilaginous disk that exists, but degenerates and involutes with age (DePalma, 1959),
although it is frequently removed from injured joints of younger patients. These more
severe AC sprains are thought to obtain superior outcomes with surgery and thus surgery is
recommended for Grades IV to VI AC sprains.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

529

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ARTHROSCOPIC OR MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERY FOR ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT
DISLOCATIONS
Recommended
Arthroscopic or minimally invasive surgical techniques are recommended for
acromioclavicular joint separations.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Grade III-V AC separations thought to need surgical repair.
Benefits
Potential improved function, reduced symptoms and cosmesis.
Harms
Infection, operative complications.
Rationale
An RCT comparing open with arthroscopic repair with TightRope systems of Rockwood III-IV
AC separations found similar results (Abdelrahman et al., 2019). One comparative trial
suggested similar results with a one- vs. two-button technique for Rockwood Types III-V AC
separations (Sun et al., 2019). Another trial comparing the TightRope system with screw
found comparable results for Rockwood III AC separations, although satisfaction was higher
with the former (Darabos et al., 2015). A trial comparing clavicular hook plate with

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

530

TightRope wire for Rockwood III separations found less operations were needed with the
TightRope wire (Cai, 2018). There is one trial comparing open with arthroscopic repair and
suggested comparable results. The other quality RCTs use different techniques for varying
types of AC separation, although they nevertheless suggest potential efficacy of
arthroscopic and/or minimally invasive surgical procedures and thus they are
recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 36 articles considered for inclusion, 7
randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

POSTOPERATIVE REHABILITATION
Different rehabilitation protocols have been reported for AC separations (2062). One postoperative rehabilitation protocol entails use of a sling and cold therapy device. At 2 weeks,
active and passive ROM exercises are initiated. Full active and passive ROM exercises are
added when the screw is removed at 2 to 3 months. Progressive strengthening is then
prescribed for 6 to 8 weeks (2062). Individualization of these protocols is likely required based
on various factors, including immediate operative results, age, conditioning, compliance,
and prior experiences. Rehabilitation programs should include education.
REHABILITATION FOR PATIENTS AFTER SURGICAL REPAIR OF ACROMIOCLAVICULAR
SEPARATIONS
Recommended
Rehabilitation is recommended for patients after surgical repair of acromioclavicular
sprains/separations.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

531

Surgical repairs of AC separations. Individualization is recommended based on various
factors, including immediate operative results, age, conditioning, compliance, and prior
experiences.
Benefits
Improved function and earlier recovery.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Weekly to 3 times a week for the first 2 weeks, then weekly to twice weekly for the next 4
weeks, then weekly to twice weekly for the following 6 to 8 weeks.
Indications for discontinuation
Recovery, plateau in recovery, noncompliance, or intolerance.
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating rehabilitation for AC separation patients (Simovitch et
al., 2009). One trial suggested that outcomes were not affected by the posture (erect or
supine) posture used during rehabilitation sessions (Ibrahim et al., 2020). However,
exercises appear necessary, and education along with a home-exercise program appears to
be required for nearly all patients. Rehabilitation is not invasive, has low adverse effects, is
moderate to high cost, but is important for optimal recovery for many of these patients and
is thus recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: acromioclavicular joint sprains,
acromioclavicular joint strains, acromioclavicular joint dislocations, acromioclavicular sprain,
acromioclavicular dislocation; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 476 articles in PubMed, 8,500 in Google
Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 6 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 36 articles considered for inclusion, 1
randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

532

review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

FOLLOW-UP VISITS
Patients with AC sprains generally require a few follow-up appointments for purposes of
monitoring symptoms, advancing treatment, and gradually reducing limitations as the
sprain resolves. Patients with more severe sprains, slower resolution, in need of operative
care, or with other accompanying disorders will require a considerably greater number of
appointments. Frequencies of appointments may also be greater where workplace
limitations are required and job demands are higher. Early post-operative rehabilitation is
advanced slowly to protect the repair.

SHOULDER FRACTURES
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The following section contains recommendations for evaluating and managing shoulder
fractures from the Evidence-Based Shoulder Disorders Panel. These recommendations are
based on critically appraised higher-quality research evidence or, when such evidence was
unavailable or inconsistent, on expert consensus as required in ACOEM’s Methodology.
Recommendations are made under the following categories:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Strongly Recommended, “A” Level
Moderately Recommended, “B” Level
Recommended, “C” Level
Insufficient – Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – No Recommendation (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – Not Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Not Recommended, “C” Level
Moderately Not Recommended, “B” Level
Strongly Not Recommended, “A” Level

OVERVIEW
Shoulder fractures are common in all age groups, from youth engaged in sports to adults in
motor vehicle crashes to elderly who have fallen (2103-2110). Many elderly patients are in
relatively poor health and susceptible to other fractures (2111-2117). A minority of shoulder
fractures occur in the course of employment, from falls, falls from heights, motor vehicle
crashes (2118-2120), and industrial crush injuries (2119). Most quality evidence for osteopenic and
osteoporotic patients is found in the literature addressing hip fractures (see Hip and Groin
Disorders Guideline). Among patients with shoulder fractures, especially those with risks for
osteoporosis, assessment of bone quality is recommended for purposes of secondary
prevention. Treatment options include calcium and vitamin D supplementation to correct
deficiencies (2121,2122) and bisphosphonates for those with low bone mass density, but also
include adequate dietary and/or supplementary calcium and vitamin D (2121,2123,2124). There
also is consideration for anabolic steroids (2123).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

533

Proximal humeral fractures are among the most common fractures and are the
predominant shoulder fracture in the elderly (2105,2110-2114). Approximately 50 to 80% of
proximal humeral fractures may be treated non-operatively (2105,2110-2133). Surgery has been
suggested for more complex fractures (2126), but there is not a consensus (2134). Surgery
increases rates of complications including hardware-related, osteonecrosis, and infection
(2126,2135-2140)
. The overall quality of available evidence for the treatment of shoulder
fractures is weak.
Fractures of the scapula occur infrequently and constitute less than 5% of shoulder fractures
(2141-2144)
. However, many scapular fracture patients have other injuries, such as thoracic
and/or head injuries (2143-2151); thus, careful evaluation and management is recommended.
There are no quality trials evaluating scapula fracture treatment. Many scapular fractures
may be managed non-operatively (2145,2152). However, some fractures are managed
surgically, particularly when they involve the displaced glenoid or scapular neck fractures,
lateral margin of the acromial process, or displaced coracoids fractures, severely displaced
scapular body fractures (2146,2152-2169).
Clavicular fractures are addressed separately (see Clavicular Fractures).

WORK LIMITATIONS
Shoulder fractures generally require work limitations. Limitations typically include no use of
the affected extremity and gradually allow increased use as healing occurs.

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
X-RAYS
X-RAYS FOR SHOULDER OR CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
Recommended
X-rays are recommended for evaluation of shoulder or clavicular fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
All patients suspected of having shoulder or clavicular fractures, as well as those with
trauma without suspicion of fracture to help rule out fracture. Scapular views are required
to evaluate scapular fractures.
Benefits
Diagnosis of a fracture, calcific tendinitis, or otherwise latent medical condition(s).
Harms
Medicalization or worsening of otherwise benign shoulder condition; minor radiation
exposure.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

534

Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining x-rays once is generally sufficient with two to three views. After initially negative
x-rays, a second set of x-rays 7-14 days after trauma is advisable if there is either a suspicion
of fracture or lack of major interval improvements. For patients with chronic shoulder pain,
it may be reasonable to obtain another set of x-rays later to re-evaluate the patient’s
condition, particularly if symptoms change.
Rationale
X-rays are helpful to evaluate for fracture. They also assist in differential diagnostic
possibilities such as tendinosis, calcific tendinitis, and arthroses, which result in different
treatment options. X-rays are non-invasive, low to moderate costly, and have little risk of
adverse effects, and therefore are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

DIAGNOSTIC ARTHROSCOPY
While arthroscopy is not indicated for simple fractures, there are other indications. See
Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

535

BONE SCANS
While bone scanning is not indicated for simple fractures, there are other indications. See
Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy.

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Computed tomography remains an important imaging procedure, particularly for bony
anatomy, whereas MRI is superior for soft tissue abnormalities. However, most patients
have issues with soft tissue rather than bony abnormalities in the shoulder, thus on a
population-basis, far fewer CT scans are ordered. CT may nevertheless be useful for
shoulder joint abnormalities where advanced imaging of the bones is required (i.e., complex
proximal humerus fracture, scapular fracture). CT also may be useful to evaluate the
anatomy in patients with contraindications for MRI (most typically an implanted metallicferrous device). CT arthrogram is often preferred when evaluating posterior or anterior
glenohumeral instability when the bony anatomy needs to be better defined – glenoid
deficiency and humeral Hill-Sachs – as MRI is not as good for bone imaging. CT arthrogram
can be used in place of MRI to evaluate for rotator cuff tear.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY FOR EVALUATION OF SHOULDER FRACTURES
Sometimes Recommended
Computed tomography is selectively recommended for the evaluation of complex proximal
humeral and glenoid/scapular fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Imaging for complex proximal humeral and glenoid/scapular fractures or other calcified
structures. For most shoulder fractures, x-rays suffice. CT may also be indicated as well for
scapular fractures with concerns about thoracic injury. CT arthrogram is often preferred
when evaluating posterior or anterior glenohumeral instability when the bony anatomy
needs to be better defined – glenoid deficiency and humeral Hill-Sachs – as MRI is not as
good for bone imaging.
Benefits
Diagnosis and understanding of the degree of complex fractures, calcific tendinitis.
Harms
Radiation exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

536

Obtaining a CT once is generally sufficient. For patients with chronic shoulder pain, it may be
reasonable to obtain a second CT later to re-evaluate the patient’s condition, particularly if
symptoms change.
Rationale
X-rays are sufficient for most fracture patient evaluations; however, CT is superior where
imaging calcified structures is required, such as for complex proximal humeral and
glenoid/scapular fractures. CT arthrogram can be used in place of MRI to evaluate for
rotator cuff tear. MRI is considered superior to computerized tomography for imaging most
shoulder abnormalities where advanced imaging of soft tissues is usually the primary
concern. A contrast CT study is minimally invasive, has few, if any, adverse effects but is
costly. It is recommended for select use.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is often used as a secondary test after x-ray for many
shoulder joint problems since it tends to be helpful for imaging soft tissues, particularly the
rotator cuff.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING FOR SHOULDER OR CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
Sometimes Recommended
MRI is selectively recommended for patients with shoulder or clavicular fractures who are
also suspected of having acute, clinically significant rotator cuff tears. It is also
recommended for select patients with subacute or chronic shoulder pain thought to
potentially have a symptomatic rotator cuff tear.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

537

Indications
Patients with shoulder fractures who are also thought to have an acute, clinically significant
rotator cuff tear or subacute or chronic shoulder pain suspected of having a rotator cuff
tear. If there is significant rotator cuff weakness, immediate imaging may be indicated. MRI
may be indicated as well for scapular fractures with concerns about thoracic injury.
Exceptions include elderly patients, those who would not undergo surgical repair, or those
who have substantial signs of pre-existing large/massive rotator cuff tear. It is also
reasonable to wait for 1 or 2 weeks to ascertain whether the condition is likely to resolve
with conservative care without obtaining an MRI. Most acute tears without significant
weakness should wait 2+ weeks prior to imaging as some patients with acute pain and
limited ROM resolve clinically. Those with subacute or chronic pain should generally have
failed additional non-operative treatment including NSAID, exercise after fracture healing
and injection(s).
Benefits
Secure a secondary diagnosis.
Harms
False positives and false negatives for rotator cuff tears.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
One moderate-quality study compared MRI with arthrography, suggesting MRI is superior to
arthrography to evaluate for rotator cuff tears (Blanchard et al., 1999); however,
arthrography alone has been largely replaced by other procedures. Otherwise, MRI has not
been evaluated in high-quality studies for shoulder joint pathology (Dinnes et al., 2003,
Leunig et al., 2004, Kassarjian et al., 2005). MRI appears particularly helpful for soft tissue
abnormalities and has been suggested for evaluations of patients with symptoms over 3
months (Bredella et al., 2005, Kassarjian et al., 2005). MRI was compared with arthroscopy
in 57 patients with shoulder pain of unclear cause (Torstensen et al., 1999). MRI was found
to be accurate in detecting 68% of rotator cuff tears and 62% accurate in detecting labral
injuries. MRI sensitivity for RC tears was 96% and specificity 49% (for labral tears, 73%
sensitive, 58% specific). The authors concluded that “MRI does not appear to be an accurate
effective tool for assessing shoulder pathologic conditions in patients in whom the clinical
picture is not clear and therefore may not be of assistance in surgical planning for patients
with these difficult conditions.”

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

538

MRI was compared with arthroscopic findings among 16 patients with trauma (Kirkley et al.,
2003). The authors found moderate correlation for superior labral lesions (k = 0. 60), fair
agreement for rotator cuff tear (k = 0. 355), Hill-Sachs (k = 1. 0), and moderate for size (k = 0.
44). A consecutive case series of 104 patients with shoulder problems were evaluated and
randomized to MRI first versus arthrography first. There were modestly fewer changes in
diagnostic categories with MRI (30%) than arthrography (37%), p >0. 5. MRI led to slightly
more changes in planned therapy (36% vs. 25%, p >0. 3). MRI was found to be 79% accurate,
81% sensitive and 78% specific for full-thickness rotator cuff tears. Arthrography was found
to be 82% accurate, 50% sensitive and 96% specific (Blanchard et al., 1999). A crosssectional comparison of MRI (1. 5T loop-gap resonator surface coil), double-contrast
arthrography, high-resolution sonography, and surgery among 38 patients with suspected
rotator cuff tears did not include all patients receiving all tests or surgery (other than MRI
and arthrography) and reported a sensitivity of MRI of 100% (Burkhead WZ, 2007).
Ultrasound detected 9/15 (60%) of tears. However, the study population was small and
biased in favor of overestimating the tests’ sensitivity.
MRI has shown increased changes in the rotator cuff and tears with increased age (Sher et
al., 1995, Needell et al., 1996), as well as a high prevalence of bony and peritendinous
shoulder abnormalities among those without symptoms (Needell et al., 1996). MRI has
reasonably good operant characteristics for full-thickness tears, although it does not have
good sensitivity for partial thickness tears (Dinnes et al., 2003). Fatty infiltration of the
rotator cuff tendons is also found on MRI and thought to signify chronicity as well as
portending a poorer surgical outcome (Berhouet et al., 2009). A comparative assessment of
T-2 weighted fast spin-echo technique with vs. without fat-suppression MRI for assessment
of rotator cuff tears among 177 patients thought to have tears found no differences in
assessments of complete tears, but differed in interpretations of partial tears (Singson et al.,
1996). Compared with surgery, sensitivity was 100% for full-thickness tears and specificity
for intact tendons was 86%. Fat suppression was felt helpful for partial tears. MRI
demonstrates acromial abnormalities and there is a higher prevalence of Type 3 acromion
processes among those with either rotator cuff tear or impingement syndrome (Epstein et
al., 1993). It has been suggested increased T2 signal in the distal clavicle may be an
indication for surgical resection.
MRIs are considered the gold standard for evaluation of osteonecrosis patients and are used
to quantify volume of affected tissue including marrow edema which is inversely correlated
with prognosis (Coombs et al., 1994, Koo et al., 1995, Scheiber et al., 1999, Cherian et al.,
2003, Radke et al., 2003, Jones et al., 2004, Harreld et al., 2009).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is often used as a secondary test after x-ray for many
shoulder joint problems since it tends to be helpful for imaging soft tissues, particularly the
rotator cuff (Cartland et al., 1992, Tirman et al., 1994, Wnorowski et al., 1997, Connell et al.,
1999, Tuite et al., 2000, Tung et al., 2000, Ardic et al., 2006, Chang et al., 2006, Reuss et al.,
2006, Chang et al., 2008, Pandya et al., 2008, McFarland et al., 2009, Mulyadi et al., 2009).
Although studies are not heterogeneous, pooled estimates of the sensitivity for fullthickness tears has been calculated and is 89% with specificity 93%, while for partial
thickness tears, these estimates are only 44% sensitivity and 90% specificity (Dinnes et al.,
2003). Similarly accuracy is lower for smaller than larger tears (Yamakawa et al., 2001).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

539

There are concerns that MRI is inferior to MR arthrography for evaluating the labrum
(Schmerl et al., 2005); thus, MRA is recommended for evaluation of the joint.
MRI is not invasive, has potential adverse effects from issues of claustrophobia or
complications of medication, but is costly. MRI is not recommended for routine shoulder
imaging and is not indicated solely to evaluate fractures, especially because CT is superior
for osseous imaging. However, it is recommended for select shoulder joint pathology
particularly involving concerns regarding secondary soft tissue pathology.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 29 articles considered for inclusion, 1 diagnostic study and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE ARTHROGRAM
Magnetic resonance (MR) arthrography combines an MRI with an arthrogram to overcome
MRI limitations and is usually performed in preference to CT arthrography unless bony
structure definition is needed as well. MR arthrography is particularly thought to be
effective for imaging labral pathology.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE ARTHROGRAM FOR DIAGNOSING SHOULDER OR CLAVICULAR
FRACTURES
Sometimes Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

540

Magnetic resonance arthrography (MRA) is selectively recommended for diagnosing labral
tears in patients with shoulder or clavicular fracture(s).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Patients with shoulder fracture(s) who also have symptoms of, or clinical suspicion of labral
tears. Patients should generally have failed non-operative treatment of the labral tear or
soft tissue including NSAID and waiting 4 to 6 weeks without trending towards resolution.
Benefits
Secure a diagnosis.
Harms
False positives and false negatives for labral tears. Arthrography improves the accuracy
especially regarding complete rotator cuff tears and significant labral tears. Small risk of
infection and complications from the injection.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
MRA has not been evaluated in quality studies among patients with shoulder fracture(s).
Although studies are heterogeneous, pooled estimates of the sensitivity for full-thickness
tears is estimated at 95% with specificity 93% (Dinnes et al., 2003). There is high prevalence
for labral injury with first shoulder dislocation based on MRA (Antonio et al., 2007).
Arthrography with low-field MR was found to be equivalent to high-field in a series of 38
patients (Loew et al., 2000). A comparison of high- versus low-field MR imaging for SLAP
tears among symptomatic patients found high field superior for diagnosing SLAP (Tung et
al., 2000). The sensitivity of high field MRA was 90% and specificity was 63%, while
sensitivity for low field was 64% and 70% specificity. MRA was found superior to CT
arthrography (CTA) and marginally better than MRI for identification of labral tears in a case
series of patients with recurrent anterior instability, prior anterior dislocation, or shoulder
pain of unknown cause (Chandnani et al., 1993). MRA sensitivity for a labral tear was 96. 4%,
MRI was 92. 9%, and CTA was 73. 1%. Specificity was 100% for all three tests; however, this
appears overstated as there were only two patients without a tear in this small case series.
MR arthrography is invasive, has adverse effects (including a low but definite risk of
infection), and is painful. It is also costly, although MRA is believed to provide better cost
effectiveness than MRI or CT arthrography for select diagnoses (Oh et al., 1999). It is likely

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

541

the best imaging procedure available for patients thought to have labral tears or patients
with good strength in order to assess the labrum and rotator cuff with traumatic injury
simultaneously, and is recommended for select use.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ULTRASOUND
Diagnostic ultrasound has been used for evaluating rotator cuff tears.
ULTRASOUND FOR DIAGNOSING SHOULDER OR CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
Sometimes Recommended
Ultrasound is selectively recommended for shoulder or clavicular fracture patients also
suspected of having rotator cuff tears, tendinoses, or impingement.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Ultrasound technicians should have sufficient skill to obviate the need for scanning (Boykin
et al., 2010, Hanchard et al., 2013); otherwise, the test introduces unnecessary redundancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

542

Patients with shoulder fracture(s) who also have symptoms and signs of a clinically
significant rotator cuff tear, tendinosis, or impingement (Naredo et al., 1999, Iannotti et al.,
2005, Ardic et al., 2006, Wall et al., 2012). Most clinical presentations should wait
approximately 2 weeks prior to imaging as some patients with acute pain and limited range
of motion resolve clinically; obvious tears are an exception to waiting two weeks. Those
with subacute or chronic pain should generally have failed additional non-operative
treatment including NSAID, exercise, and injection(s) (Moosikasuwan et al., 2005,
Ottenheijm et al., 2010). A MR arthrogram is recommended for suspected labral injury (see
below) (Ardic et al., 2006).
Benefits
Secure a diagnosis.
Harms
False positives and false negatives.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Repeat ultrasound should be based on significant change in symptoms and/or examination
findings.
Rationale
Ultrasound has been compared with physical examination findings, suggesting physical
exam identified fewer abnormalities compared with ultrasound, though there was not
clinical correlation with treatment outcomes (Kim et al., 2007). Ultrasound utilized to
evaluate asymptomatic shoulders found increased prevalence of full-thickness tears with
increased age (Sher et al., 1995, Tempelhof et al., 1999), with approximately 6% among 212
individuals (Schibany et al., 2004) and in 7. 6% of 420 patients (Moosmayer et al., 2009).
Asymptomatic tears increase in prevalence by age – 50 to 59 (2. 1%) versus 60 to 69 (5. 7%)
versus 70 to 79 (15%) (Moosmayer et al., 2009).
Ultrasound is thought to be relatively effective for identifying full-thickness tears (Middleton
et al., 1986, Furtschegger et al., 1988, Mack et al., 1988, Mack et al., 1988, Brenneke et al.,
1992, Iannotti et al., 1996, Zehetgruber et al., 2002, Ottenheijm et al., 2010, Smith et al.,
2011); however, it appears somewhat less effective for identifying partial-thickness tears
(Brenneke et al., 1992, Naredo et al., 1999, Smith et al., 2011). A surgical case series of 42
patients attempted to determine the diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound. Ultrasound
detected all full-thickness tears (100% sensitive, 97% specific), but only 6 of 13 of the
partial-thickness tears (46% sensitive, 97% specific). One full-thickness tear was falsely
diagnosed. Another study has suggested sensitivity for detection of tear size of 83 to 86%.
(Ianotti) Ultrasound has advantages of being able to move the arm actively or passively
during the examination; it is less expensive; and it may be available in most centers. (Boykin,
Friedman et al.) When conservative treatment failed, skilled physician’s usingultrasound
reportedly had high diagnostic accuracy identifying tendinopathy, calcifying tendonitis, and

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

543

partial- and full- thickness tears. (Moosikasuwan, Miller et al., Ottenheijm, Jansen et al.)
SLAP lesions cannot be well visualized using ultrasound. (Hanchard, Lenza et al.)
Impingement was felt to have been diagnosed in 27 of 34 cases (79% sensitive, 96% positive
predictive value). (Read and Perko) A small study of ultrasound the day before surgery for
shoulder arthritis in 20 patients suggested that ultrasound was accurate for evaluating
hypertrophy of the bursa (93% sensitive, 83% specific), biceps tendon rupture (70%
sensitive, 100% specific) and rotator cuff tear (83% sensitive, 57% specific ). (Alasaarela,
Leppilahti et al.) Ultrasound-guided MR arthrography was evaluated in an RCT with anterior
versus posterior approaches and found equal ratings of discomfort. (Koivikko and
Mustonen) Ultrasound is not invasive, is of low to moderate cost, and has little risk of
adverse effects; therefore, although there are concerns that MRI may be superior for
imaging most of shoulder soft tissue, ultrasound is recommended particularly for evaluation
of rotator cuff tears as a complication of shoulder fracture(s). The main disadvantage is the
high dependency on the physician’s skills. (Boykin, Friedman et al., Hanchard, Lenza et al.)
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SINGLE-PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT)
SINGLE-PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT) FOR SHOULDER OR
CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
Not Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

544

Single-proton emission computed tomography (SPECT) is not recommended for the
evaluation of patients with shoulder or clavicular fractures.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain. One study found
SPECT helpful in evaluating patients with inflammatory arthropathies, particularly if there
are concerns about the SI joints (Hanly, 1993). Some data suggest SPECT may outperform
bone scanning. Additional studies are needed to determine if SPECT or PET adds something
to the diagnosis, treatment, and outcomes beyond that obtained by a careful history,
physical examination, plain x-rays, and clinical impression before it can be recommended for
evaluating shoulder disorders.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET)
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET) FOR SHOULDER OR CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
Not Recommended
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

545

Positron emission tomography (PET) is not recommended for the evaluation of patients with
shoulder or clavicular fractures.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain. One study found
SPECT helpful in evaluating patients with inflammatory arthropathies, particularly if there
are concerns about the SI joints (Hanly, 1993). Some data suggest SPECT may outperform
bone scanning. Additional studies are needed to determine if SPECT or PET adds something
to the diagnosis, treatment and outcomes beyond that obtained by a careful history,
physical examination, plain x-rays, and clinical impression before it can be recommended for
evaluating shoulder disorders.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

546

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
INITIAL CARE
Initial care of a patient with fracture generally involves preclusion of use, prompt
assessment of the severity, a determination of whether surgery or non-operative
management is best, and education. Identification of accompanying disorders, such as
rotator cuff tear, allows for treatment of a second condition to substantially reduce or
resolve the symptoms. Over-the-counter analgesics, self-applications of heat and ice, and
slings and immobilizers have been used to treat non-displaced fractures and manage pain.
OVER-THE-COUNTER (OTC) ANALGESICS FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OR CLAVICULAR
FRACTURES
Recommended
Over-the-counter analgesics are recommended for treatment of shoulder or clavicular
fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Shoulder fractures, usually as adjuncts to other treatments.
Benefits
Self-management of the pain.
Harms
Negligible for OTC analgesics unless acetaminophen doses exceed 3. 5 g, or the patient has
liver disease or other contraindications.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Analgesics should be used per manufacturer’s recommendations.
Indications for discontinuation
Fracture healing, resolution of pain, lack of efficacy, intolerance, complication.
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating analgesics for managing shoulder fractures. There is
some evidence of delayed fracture healing with NSAIDs. However, analgesics and OTC
NSAIDs are likely helpful and there is some quality evidence for the use of prescription

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

547

NSAIDs for other shoulder nociceptive pain (see NSAIDs for rotator cuff tendinopathy). Thus,
they are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SELF-APPLICATION OF HEAT OR ICE FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OR CLAVICULAR
FRACTURES
Recommended
Self-application of heat or ice is recommended for treatment of shoulder or clavicular
fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Shoulder fractures, usually as adjuncts to other treatments.
Benefits
Self-management of the pain.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

548

Harms
Possible cold injuries or burns.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Self-applications of ice or heat are typically 3-5 times/day. Ice is more typically used in the
acute phase for fractures.
Indications for discontinuation
Fracture healing, resolution of pain, lack of efficacy, intolerance, complication.
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating ice or heat for managing shoulder fractures. However,
they may be helpful, have generally negligible adverse effects, are of negligible cost, and
thus they are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

549

MEDICATIONS
Over-the-counter medications may be helpful to manage pain. These especially include
acetaminophen and NSAIDs (1340,1341), with NSAIDs showing greater efficacy, but overall
acetaminophen has a generally greater safety profile. Generally, the only medications
commonly used for fracture patients are NSAIDs and brief, post-operative use of opioids in
select patients. Other medications may be indicated if there is osteopenia.

DEVICES
Slings, braces, and immobilizers are used in the acute and post-operative treatment phases
to facilitate fracture healing. They are then weaned off, as they naturally promote debility
and predispose towards adhesive capsulitis.
SLINGS, BRACES, AND IMMOBILIZERS FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER FRACTURES
Recommended
Slings, braces, and immobilizers are recommended for the treatment of shoulder fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Acute shoulder fractures. Also used in the perioperative timeframe. Should be weaned off
when able, with institution of range-of-motion exercises at the earliest clinically-indicated
opportunity.
Benefits
Facilitate fracture and operative healing.
Harms
Promotes debility and adhesive capsulitis.
Indications for discontinuation
Must be determined by the orthopedist or other treating physician with respect to fracture
healing and/or operative fixation.
Rationale
One RCT suggested there was no difference between 1 and 3 weeks of immobilization for
nonoperatively treated proximal humeral fractures (Martinez, 2021). There are no other
quality trials evaluating slings, braces and immobilizers for managing shoulder fractures.
However, slings, braces, and immobilizers are indicated for shoulder fractures with any
instability and/or need to immobilize while fracture callous formation or operative healing is
underway and minimization of movement is clinically required.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

550

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 29 articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MAGNETS FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER FRACTURES
Not Recommended
Magnets and magnetic stimulation are not recommended for treatment of shoulder
fractures.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Rationale
Magnets and magnetic stimulation have been evaluated in quality trials for other
musculoskeletal disorders and were found to be ineffective. Thus, they are not
recommended for treatment of shoulder fractures.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

551

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
TAPING FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER FRACTURES
Not Recommended
Taping is not recommended for treatment of shoulder fractures.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Rationale
Taping has been evaluated in quality trials for other muscloskeletal disorders and was found
to be ineffective. Thus, it is not recommended for treatment of shoulder fractures.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

552

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
OTHER MODALITIES FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER FRACTURES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of diathermy, infrared therapy, laser
therapy, high-voltage galvanic, H-wave stimulation, iontophoresis, microcurrent,
percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (PENS), sympathetic electrotherapy, interferential
therapy, or transcutaneous electrical stimulation (TENS) for the treatment of shoulder
fractures.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of these treatments for these shoulder
fracture patients; thus, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

553

bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ALLIED HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
ACUPUNCTURE FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER FRACTURES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against acupuncture to treat shoulder fractures.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials of acupuncture for treatment of shoulder fractures and thus there
is no recommendation for or against acupuncture.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

554

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANUAL THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER FRACTURES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of manual therapy for shoulder
fractures.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of manual therapy for shoulder fracture
patients. Thus, there is no recommendation for or against its use.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

555

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANIPULATION OR MOBILIZATION FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER FRACTURES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of mobilization or manipulation for
shoulder fractures.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of these treatments for shoulder fracture
patients; thus, there is no recommendation for or against their use.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MASSAGE FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER FRACTURES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of massage for shoulder fractures.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

556

Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials demonstrating efficacy of massage for shoulder fracture patients;
thus, there is no recommendation for or against its use.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
LOW-INTENSITY PULSED ULTRASOUND FOR TREATMENT OF FRACTURES
Not Recommended
Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound is not recommended for treatment of Type I (mid-shaft)
clavicular fractures.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

557

While there is no quality evidence regarding shoulder fractures, there is one high-quality
RCT for clavicular fractures showing lack of efficacy to accelerate healing (Lubbert et al.,
2008). Thus, by inference, ultrasound is also not indicated for treatment of shoulder
fractures.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

INJECTION THERAPIES
Steroid, viscosupplementation, platelet-rich plasma, and prolotherapy injections are
generally not indicated for shoulder fractures. There may be other indications.
INJECTIONS FOR SHOULDER FRACTURES
Not Recommended
Steroid injections, viscosupplementation, platelet-rich plasma injections, and prolotherapy
injections are generally not indicated for shoulder fractures.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

558

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 29 articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trail and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
NONOPERATIVE TREATMENT FOR SHOULDER FRACTURES
Recommended
Nonoperative treatment for shoulder fractures is recommended for most patients with
nondisplaced or minimally displaced fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Non- or minimally displaced fractures. Also, based on numerous factors assessed and
evaluated in aggregate by the orthopedic surgeon, including surgeon’s preferences and
experiences, open fractures, multiple-part fractures, associated vascular injuries,
polytrauma, age, bone quality, status of the rotator cuff, hand dominance, smoking status,
preexisting pathology, medical comorbidities, bilateral humeral fractures, radial nerve palsy
after manipulation, neurological loss after penetrating injuries, and unacceptable alignment
(Bell et al., 1985, Brumback et al., 1986, Robinson et al., 1993, Changulani et al., 2007,
Drosdowech et al., 2008).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

559

Benefits
Faster recovery without surgery if able to be treated non-operatively.
Harms
Negligible provided there is sufficient alignment and approximation to result in healing.
Rationale
Fracture classification systems have been developed for these fractures (Kocher, 1896,
Codman, 1990, Neer, 1960, Hertel, 1996, Mora Guix et al., 2009), although interrater
reliability is low and their impact on management remains unclear (Sidor et al., 1993,
Siebenrock et al., 1993, Brien et al., 1995). For proximal humeral fractures, there are few
quality trials comparing operative treatment with non-operative treatment or comparing
various operative treatments and approaches. Two moderate-quality trials have compared
operative with non-operative treatments in fairly narrow indications; thus, the value of
these trials is sharply limited in their ability to address the operative vs. non-operative
indications for the broad group of proximal humeral fracture patients (Kristiansen et al.,
1988, Zyto et al., 1997). One moderate-quality trial evaluating 3 or 4-part displaced proximal
humeral fractures in the elderly failed to find superiority of the operative approach (Zyto et
al., 1997). The second trial found an external fixator, although not commonly used, was
superior to a sling to manage displaced proximal humeral fractures that had been reduced
(Kristiansen et al., 1988).
Surgical indications are numerous, but most proximal humeral fractures are treated nonoperatively with good results (Neer, 1970, Neer, 1968, Balfour et al., 1982, Mills et al.,
1985). Thus, non-operative treatment is recommended for many of these fractures.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 29 articles considered for inclusion, 5 randomized trails and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

560

PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SURGICAL TREATMENT FOR SHOULDER FRACTURES
Sometimes Recommended
Surgical intervention for shoulder fractures is recommended for select patients with
displaced fractures. Arthroplasty, most commonly hemiarthroplasty, is recommended for
select patients with displaced proximal humeral fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Based on numerous factors assessed and evaluated in aggregate by the orthopedic surgeon,
including (but not limited to) the surgeon’s preferences and experiences, open fractures,
multiple-part fractures, associated vascular injuries, polytrauma, age, bone quality, status of
the rotator cuff, hand dominance, smoking status, preexisting pathology, medical
comorbidities, bilateral humeral fractures, radial nerve palsy after manipulation,
neurological loss after penetrating injuries, and unacceptable alignment (Bell et al., 1985,
Brumback et al., 1986, Robinson et al., 1993, Changulani et al., 2007, Drosdowech et al.,
2008).
Benefits
Superior recovery
Harms
Operative complications including hardware-related, osteonecrosis, and infection. For
arthroplasty, potential for worse results compared with less major surgical treatment.
Rationale
Though proximal humeral fractures have a relatively high incidence, the great variability in
the fractures themselves and number of viable options for surgical treatment leads to
difficulty comparing treatment modalities. One RCT suggested comparable results at 2 years
when comparing surgical and nonsurgical treatment of displaced proximal humeral fractures

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

561

(Handoll et al., 2015, Rangan et al., 2015, Handoll et al., 2017, Norman et al., 2020). The lack
of quality literature comparing options has been widely noted and confirmed by systematic
reviews (Misra et al., 2001, Handoll et al., 2003, Bhandari et al., 2004, Lanting et al., 2008,
Brorson et al., 2009, Handoll et al., 2015, Nijs et al., 2009).
Operative procedures include conventional, angular stable, and locked plates (Brunner et
al., 2009, Szyszkowitz et al., 1993, Sturzenegger et al., 1982, Drosdowech et al., 2008, Misra
et al., 2001, Lin, 2006, Sehr et al., 1988, Plecko et al., 2005, Moda et al., 1990, Fankhauser et
al., 2005, Esser, 1994, Rouleau et al., 2009, Ziegler et al., 2019, Chen et al., 2019, Rouleau et
al., 2020, Sohn et al., 2017, Sudkamp et al., 2009), external fixators (Kristiansen et al., 1987,
Kristiansen et al., 1989, Karatosun et al., 2002), partial or hemiarthroplasty (Szyszkowitz et
al., 1993, Jones et al., 1987, Neer, 1970, Brorson et al., 2009, Nijs et al., 2009, Neer, 1968,
Mighell et al., 2003, Kay et al., 1988, Kontakis et al., 2008, Kontakis et al., 2008, Moeckel et
al., 1992, Bosch et al., 1998, Green et al., 1993, Movin et al., 1998, Zyto et al., 1995, Zyto et
al., 1998, Robinson et al., 2008, Rietveld et al., 1988, Kraulis et al., 1976, Boileau et al., 2001,
Demirhan et al., 2003, Dimakopoulos et al., 1997, Paavolainen et al., 1983, Tanner et al.,
1983, Stableforth, 1984, Goldman et al., 1995, Prakash et al., 2002, Skutek et al., 1998,
Wretenberg et al., 1997, Schlegel, 1997), reverse arthroplasty (Kontakis et al., 2008, Matsen
et al., 2007, Rockwood, 2007, Martin et al., 2008), screws and cannulated screws
(Sturzenegger et al., 1982, Zingg et al., 2002, Bungaro et al., 1998, Chen et al., 1998), nails
(Lee et al., 1981, Young et al., 2008, Rodriguez-Merchan, 1995, Benegas et al., 2014,
Gracitelli et al., 2016), compression plates (Rodriguez-Merchan, 1995), cerclage wire (Lee et
al., 1981, Szyszkowitz et al., 1993), Kirschner wires (Jakob et al., 1991, Bungaro et al., 1998,
Darder et al., 1993), use of intramedullary bone cement (Matsuda et al., 1999), and a
combination tension band technique (Darder et al., 1993, Wijgman et al., 2002, Kristiansen
et al., 1989, Zyto et al., 1997). Pins are usually removed in 3 to 6 weeks. Robotic approaches
have been used (Kröger et al., 2021).
Despite a plethora of techniques, quality comparative trials are nearly completely lacking
(Lanting et al., 2008). Conclusions for younger populations and high-physical demand
patients are lacking quality evidence. Additionally, the variability of the types of fractures
provides additional uncertainty regarding optimal intervention(s). Glenohumeral joint
lavage has been shown to not be of benefit (Biermann et al., 2020). Thus, there is no
recommendation for or against the use of a specific product; however surgical treatment of
complex or displaced fractures is recommended.
For proximal humeral fractures, there are no quality trials comparing arthroplasty and hemiarthroplasty with other surgical approaches to ascertain whether these approaches are
superior. Clinical results suggest these are successful treatments, and thus they are
recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

562

reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 29 articles considered for inclusion, 14 randomized trails and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ARTHROPLASTY FOR SHOULDER FRACTURES
Sometimes Recommended
Arthroplasty, most commonly hemiarthroplasty, is recommended for select patients with
displaced proximal humeral fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Select patients with displaced proximal humeral fractures.
Benefits
Superior results compared with other approaches.
Harms
Operative complications including hardware-related, osteonecrosis, and infection. Potential
for worse results compared with less major surgeries.
Rationale
For proximal humeral fractures, there are no quality trials comparing arthroplasty and hemiarthroplasty with other surgical approaches to ascertain whether these approaches are
superior. Clinical results suggest these are successful treatments, and thus they are
recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

563

trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
REVERSE ARTHROPLASTY FOR SHOULDER FRACTURES
Sometimes Recommended
Reverse shoulder arthroplasty is recommended for select patients with displaced proximal
humeral fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Select patients with displaced proximal humeral fractures.
Benefits
Superior results compared with other approaches.
Harms
Operative complications including hardware-related, osteonecrosis, and infection. Potential
for worse results compared with less major surgeries.
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

564

For select patients with proximal humerus fractures, reverse total shoulder arthroplasty is
recommended over hemiarthroplasty or plate fixation. One multicenter RCT demonstrated
improved outcomes in elderly patients treated with RTSA as compared to ORIF for intracapsular proximal humerus fractures (Fraser, 2020). There have been three RCT comparing
RTSA to hemiarthroplasty that suggest improved patient outcome scores, better overall
range of motion, and lower reoperation rate with RTSA (Sebastia-Forcada, 2014, Jonsson,
2021, Laas, 2021). Systematic reviews and meta-analyses also suggest more favorable
clinical outcomes in patients treated with RTSA as compared to hemiarthroplasty (Pizzo,
2021, Austin, 2019, Shukla, 2016).
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

REHABILITATION PROGRAMS
Therapy including education and exercise is thought to be particularly important, especially
for more severely affected patients, those with complications, the elderly, or those with
comorbidities (2170-2172). There are variable durations of immobilization prior to exercise that
have been used to treat non-operatively treated impacted proximal humeral fractures (21252128,2170-2176)
. Slings have been utilized, especially for the first 1 to 3 weeks of treatment
(2111,2177-2179)
. Early ROM has been advocated (2175,2180,2181).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

565

EARLY MOBILIZATION FOR SHOULDER FRACTURES
Recommended
Early mobilization is strongly recommended for most stable shoulder fractures, including
proximal humeral fractures.
Strength of evidence Strongly Recommended, Evidence (A)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Most patients with stable shoulder fractures, including proximal humeral fractures
(Hodgson et al., 2003, Hodgson et al., 2007, Lefevre-Colau et al., 2007, Agorastides et al.,
2007, Kristiansen et al., 1989).
Benefits
Earlier and improved return to function.
Harms
Theoretical aggravation of a fracture if begun before sufficiently healed.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
The goal is to begin range of motion as early as possible to help prevent stiffness. Frequent
follow-up may help to transition the patient from immobilization to motion. Begin range of
motion once fracture is stable- very early for stable impacted fractures. Other fractures can
wait until the proximal humerus moves as if it is one unit- up to four weeks for most
fractures. Treating orthopedist must ascertain whether early mobilization is appropriate.
Considerations include patient age, fracture type, post-reduction or post-surgical results,
comorbidities. Early mobilization generally starts within 1 week.
Rationale
Four high- and moderate-quality trials have evaluated early mobilization in patients with
various types of proximal humeral fractures. All quality trials either show superiority or
equivalency of early mobilization. A high-quality trial of impacted proximal fractures treated
non-operatively suggested early mobilization is superior (Lefevre-Colau et al., 2007). An
early mobilization program for minimally displaced two-part non-operatively managed
proximal humeral fractures was compared with delayed with the beginning within 1 week
(Hodgson et al., 2003, Hodgson et al., 2007). A moderate-quality study of an early
mobilization program for fractures that were reduced found less pain and better function
with earlier mobilization (Kristiansen et al., 1989). An additional trial in post-operative
patients also suggested early mobilization was superior (Agorastides et al., 2007). Treating
orthopedist must ascertain whether early mobilization is appropriate. Early mobilization is
cost effective; therefore, it is recommended for most patients.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

566

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 29 articles considered for inclusion, 8 randomized trials and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
EDUCATION AND EXERCISES FOR SHOULDER FRACTURES
Recommended
Education and exercise are strongly recommended for most shoulder fractures, including
proximal humeral and/or scapular fracture patients.
Strength of evidence Strongly Recommended, Evidence (A)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Most patients with shoulder fractures, including proximal humeral fractures.
Benefits
Improved compliance with the rehabilitation program and faster return of function.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Education may include adaptive techniques and use of adaptive equipment (as indicated) to
facilitate continued participation in daily activities despite limitations of shoulder.
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

567

Four high- and moderate-quality trials have evaluated early mobilization in patients with
various types of proximal humeral fractures. All quality trials either show superiority or
equivalency of early mobilization. A high-quality trial of impacted proximal fractures treated
non-operatively suggested early mobilization is superior (Lefevre-Colau et al., 2007). An
early mobilization program for minimally displaced 2-part non-operatively managed
proximal humeral fractures was compared with delayed with the beginning within 1 week
(Hodgson et al., 2003, Hodgson et al., 2007). A moderate-quality study of an early
mobilization program for fractures that were reduced found less pain and better function
with earlier mobilization (Kristiansen et al., 1989). An additional trial in post-operative
patients also suggested early mobilization was superior (Agorastides et al., 2007). Treating
orthopedist must ascertain whether early mobilization is appropriate. One trial suggested
task-oriented exercises improved disability compared to general physical therapy over a
one-year timeline (Monticone et al., 2021). Education and exercises are not invasive, appear
to have few adverse effects, and are likely cost effective; therefore, they are recommended
for most patients.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 29 articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SELF-TRAINING FOR SHOULDER FRACTURES
Sometimes Recommended
Self-training exercise is moderately recommended for select shoulder fractures, incuding
patients with proximal humeral fractures.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence High
Indications

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

568

Patients with shoulder fractures including proximal humeral fractures who are motivated
and compliant with exercises (Lungberg et al., 1979, Bertoft et al., 1984, Revay et al., 1992).
Benefits
Improved results from the rehabilitation program and faster return of function.
Harms
Negligible.
Rationale
Three moderate-quality trials have documented self-training is equivalent to supervised
training (Lungberg et al., 1979, Bertoft et al., 1984, Revay et al., 1992). Considerations
include patient age, fracture type, post-reduction or post-surgical results, comorbidities.
Self-training is not invasive, has few adverse effects, and is low to moderate cost; thus, it is
recommended for most proximal humeral fracture patients.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

569

FOLLOW-UP VISITS
Patients with fractures generally require several follow-up appointments for purposes of
monitoring symptoms, advancing treatment, advancing activities, and gradually reducing
limitations. The number of follow-up appointments is higher when surgery is needed, the
type of surgery and post-operative treatment care (e.g., AAOS guideline), patient-specific
factors and/or there are needs to treat a co-existent condition. Frequencies of
appointments may also be greater if workplace limitations are required, job demands are
higher, or where job modifications or adaptive equipment are required. Frequencies may
also be higher based on employer and insurer requests or needs. Post-operative
rehabilitation can be considerable, particularly in older patients with other associated
injuries such as rotator cuff injuries. In those cases, there may be a requirement for therapy
on a prolonged basis to recover as much function as possible.

CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The following section contains recommendations for evaluating and managing clavicular
fractures from the Evidence-Based Shoulder Disorders Panel. These recommendations are
based on critically appraised higher-quality research evidence or, when such evidence was
unavailable or inconsistent, on expert consensus as required in ACOEM’s Methodology.
Recommendations are made under the following categories:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Strongly Recommended, “A” Level
Moderately Recommended, “B” Level
Recommended, “C” Level
Insufficient – Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – No Recommendation (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – Not Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Not Recommended, “C” Level
Moderately Not Recommended, “B” Level
Strongly Not Recommended, “A” Level

OVERVIEW
Fractures of the clavicle are among the most common fractures of the shoulder, constituting
an estimated 35 to 66% (49,2182-2186). They particularly occur among children and young
adults, and are typically related to lateral falls on the shoulder, falls on an outstretched arm,
sporting injuries, vehicular crashes, and other accidents (2187,2188). Most fractures involve the
middle third of the clavicle (2065,2182-2191). A “floating shoulder” is a term used to describe
ipsilateral fractures of the clavicular shaft and the scapular neck (2146,2149,2150,2192-2197).

WORK LIMITATIONS
Shoulder fractures generally require work limitations. For simple clavicular fractures,
limitations typically include minimizing use of the affected extremity and gradually allow
increased use as healing occurs. In contrast with the acute phase of managing humeral
fractures, patients with clavicular fractures generally wear a brace and are allowed
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

570

unrestricted light use, keyboarding, paperwork and other tasks involving under 5 pounds of
force (push, pull, lift).

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
X-RAYS
X-RAYS FOR SHOULDER OR CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
Recommended
X-rays are recommended for evaluation of shoulder or clavicular fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
All patients suspected of having shoulder or clavicular fractures, as well as those with
trauma without suspicion of fracture to help rule out fracture. Scapular views are required
to evaluate scapular fractures.
Benefits
Diagnosis of a fracture, calcific tendinitis, or otherwise latent medical condition(s).
Harms
Medicalization or worsening of otherwise benign shoulder condition; minor radiation
exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining x-rays once is generally sufficient with two to three views. After initially negative
x-rays, a second set of x-rays 7-14 days after trauma is advisable if there is either a suspicion
of fracture or lack of major interval improvements. For patients with chronic shoulder pain,
it may be reasonable to obtain another set of x-rays later to re-evaluate the patient’s
condition, particularly if symptoms change.
Rationale
X-rays are helpful to evaluate for fracture. They also assist in differential diagnostic
possibilities such as tendinosis, calcific tendinitis, and arthroses, which result in different
treatment options. X-rays are non-invasive, low to moderate costly, and have little risk of
adverse effects, and therefore are recommended.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

571

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Computerized tomography remains an important imaging procedure, particularly for bony
anatomy, whereas MRI is superior for soft tissue abnormalities. However, most patients
have issues with soft tissue rather than bony abnormalities in the shoulder; thus, on a
population-basis, far fewer CT scans are ordered. CT may nevertheless be useful for
shoulder joint abnormalities where advanced imaging of the bones is required (i.e., complex
proximal humerus fracture, scapular fracture). CT also may be useful to evaluate the
anatomy in patients with contraindications for MRI (most typically an implanted metallicferrous device). CT arthrogram is often preferred when evaluating posterior or anterior
glenohumeral instability when the bony anatomy needs to be better defined – glenoid
deficiency and humeral Hill-Sachs – as MRI is not as good for bone imaging. CT arthrogram
can be used in place of MRI to evaluate for rotator cuff tear.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY FOR EVALUATION OF CLAVICLE FRACTURES
Not Recommended
Computerized tomography is rarely needed for isolated clavicular fractures. It is selectively
recommended for the evaluation of complex proximal humeral and glenoid/scapular
fractures.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

572

Indications
Generally not indicated for clavicular fractures. Imaging may be indicated for complex
proximal humeral and glenoid/scapular fractures or other calcified structures. For most
shoulder fractures, x-rays suffice. CT arthrogram is often preferred when evaluating
posterior or anterior glenohumeral instability when the bony anatomy needs to be better
defined – glenoid deficiency and humeral Hill-Sachs – as MRI is not as good for bone
imaging.
Benefits
Diagnosis and understanding of the degree of complex fractures, calcific tendinitis.
Harms
Radiation exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining a CT once is generally sufficient. For patients with chronic shoulder pain, it may be
reasonable to obtain a second CT later to re-evaluate the patient’s condition, particularly if
symptoms change.
Rationale
X-rays are sufficient for most clavicular fractures. CT Is superior where imaging calcified
structures is required, such as for complex proximal humeral and glenoid/scapular fractures.
CT arthrogram can be used in place of MRI to evaluate for rotator cuff tear. MRI is
considered superior to computerized tomography for imaging most shoulder abnormalities
where advanced imaging of soft tissues is usually the primary concern. A contrast CT study is
minimally invasive, has few, if any, adverse effects but is costly. It is recommended for select
use.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

573

reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

DIAGNOSTIC ANESTHETIC INJECTIONS
Diagnostic injections are not needed for patients with simple clavicular fractures. Diagnostic
injections particularly of the subacromial space, glenohumeral joint and acromioclavicular
joint are sometimes performed. However, they are nearly always performed in combination
with a therapeutic intervention, such as a glucocorticosteroid injection. Injection with a
therapeutic agent is nearly always preferable due to less overall invasiveness with 1
injection rather than 2, as well as the potential to assess the patient both immediately postinjection for diagnostic purposes as well as longer term for therapeutic purposes. See
Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy Injections.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is often used as a secondary test after x-ray for many
shoulder joint problems because it tends to be helpful for imaging soft tissues, particularly
the rotator cuff.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING FOR SHOULDER OR CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
Sometimes Recommended
MRI is selectively recommended for patients with shoulder or clavicular fractures who are
also suspected of having acute, clinically significant rotator cuff tears. It is also
recommended for select patients with subacute or chronic shoulder pain thought to
potentially have a symptomatic rotator cuff tear.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Patients with shoulder fractures who are also thought to have an acute, clinically significant
rotator cuff tear or subacute or chronic shoulder pain suspected of having a rotator cuff
tear. If there is significant rotator cuff weakness, immediate imaging may be indicated. MRI
may be indicated as well for scapular fractures with concerns about thoracic injury.
Exceptions include elderly patients, those who would not undergo surgical repair, or those
who have substantial signs of pre-existing large/massive rotator cuff tear. It is also
reasonable to wait for 1 or 2 weeks to ascertain whether the condition is likely to resolve
with conservative care without obtaining an MRI. Most acute tears without significant
weakness should wait 2+ weeks prior to imaging as some patients with acute pain and
limited ROM resolve clinically. Those with subacute or chronic pain should generally have
failed additional non-operative treatment including NSAID, exercise after fracture healing
and injection(s).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

574

Benefits
Secure a secondary diagnosis.
Harms
False positives and false negatives for rotator cuff tears.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
One moderate-quality study compared MRI with arthrography, suggesting MRI is superior to
arthrography to evaluate for rotator cuff tears (Blanchard et al., 1999); however,
arthrography alone has been largely replaced by other procedures. Otherwise, MRI has not
been evaluated in high-quality studies for shoulder joint pathology (Dinnes et al., 2003,
Leunig et al., 2004, Kassarjian et al., 2005). MRI appears particularly helpful for soft tissue
abnormalities and has been suggested for evaluations of patients with symptoms over 3
months (Bredella et al., 2005, Kassarjian et al., 2005). MRI was compared with arthroscopy
in 57 patients with shoulder pain of unclear cause (Torstensen et al., 1999). MRI was found
to be accurate in detecting 68% of rotator cuff tears and 62% accurate in detecting labral
injuries. MRI sensitivity for RC tears was 96% and specificity 49% (for labral tears, 73%
sensitive, 58% specific). The authors concluded that “MRI does not appear to be an accurate
effective tool for assessing shoulder pathologic conditions in patients in whom the clinical
picture is not clear and therefore may not be of assistance in surgical planning for patients
with these difficult conditions. ”
MRI was compared with arthroscopic findings among 16 patients with trauma (Kirkley et al.,
2003). The authors found moderate correlation for superior labral lesions (k = 0. 60), fair
agreement for rotator cuff tear (k = 0. 355), Hill-Sachs (k = 1. 0), and moderate for size (k = 0.
44). A consecutive case series of 104 patients with shoulder problems were evaluated and
randomized to MRI first versus arthrography first. There were modestly fewer changes in
diagnostic categories with MRI (30%) than arthrography (37%), p >0. 5. MRI led to slightly
more changes in planned therapy (36% vs. 25%, p >0. 3). MRI was found to be 79% accurate,
81% sensitive and 78% specific for full-thickness rotator cuff tears. Arthrography was found
to be 82% accurate, 50% sensitive and 96% specific (Blanchard et al., 1999). A crosssectional comparison of MRI (1. 5T loop-gap resonator surface coil), double-contrast
arthrography, high-resolution sonography, and surgery among 38 patients with suspected
rotator cuff tears did not include all patients receiving all tests or surgery (other than MRI
and arthrography) and reported a sensitivity of MRI of 100% (Burkhead WZ, 2007).
Ultrasound detected 9/15 (60%) of tears. However, the study population was small and
biased in favor of overestimating the tests’ sensitivity.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

575

MRI has shown increased changes in the rotator cuff and tears with increased age (Sher et
al., 1995, Needell et al., 1996), as well as a high prevalence of bony and peritendinous
shoulder abnormalities among those without symptoms (Needell et al., 1996). MRI has
reasonably good operant characteristics for full-thickness tears, although it does not have
good sensitivity for partial thickness tears (Dinnes et al., 2003). Fatty infiltration of the
rotator cuff tendons is also found on MRI and thought to signify chronicity as well as
portending a poorer surgical outcome (Berhouet et al., 2009). A comparative assessment of
T-2 weighted fast spin-echo technique with vs. without fat-suppression MRI for assessment
of rotator cuff tears among 177 patients thought to have tears found no differences in
assessments of complete tears, but differed in interpretations of partial tears (Singson et al.,
1996). Compared with surgery, sensitivity was 100% for full-thickness tears and specificity
for intact tendons was 86%. Fat suppression was felt helpful for partial tears. MRI
demonstrates acromial abnormalities and there is a higher prevalence of Type 3 acromion
processes among those with either rotator cuff tear or impingement syndrome (Epstein et
al., 1993). It has been suggested increased T2 signal in the distal clavicle may be an
indication for surgical resection.
MRIs are considered the gold standard for evaluation of osteonecrosis patients and are used
to quantify volume of affected tissue including marrow edema which is inversely correlated
with prognosis (Coombs et al., 1994, Koo et al., 1995, Scheiber et al., 1999, Cherian et al.,
2003, Radke et al., 2003, Jones et al., 2004, Harreld et al., 2009).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is often used as a secondary test after x-ray for many
shoulder joint problems since it tends to be helpful for imaging soft tissues, particularly the
rotator cuff (Cartland et al., 1992, Tirman et al., 1994, Wnorowski et al., 1997, Connell et al.,
1999, Tuite et al., 2000, Tung et al., 2000, Ardic et al., 2006, Chang et al., 2006, Reuss et al.,
2006, Chang et al., 2008, Pandya et al., 2008, McFarland et al., 2009, Mulyadi et al., 2009).
Although studies are not heterogeneous, pooled estimates of the sensitivity for fullthickness tears has been calculated and is 89% with specificity 93%, while for partial
thickness tears, these estimates are only 44% sensitivity and 90% specificity (Dinnes et al.,
2003). Similarly accuracy is lower for smaller than larger tears (Yamakawa et al., 2001).
There are concerns that MRI is inferior to MR arthrography for evaluating the labrum
(Schmerl et al., 2005); thus, MRA is recommended for evaluation of the joint.
MRI is not invasive, has potential adverse effects from issues of claustrophobia or
complications of medication, but is costly. MRI is not recommended for routine shoulder
imaging and is not indicated solely to evaluate fractures, especially because CT is superior
for osseous imaging. However, it is recommended for select shoulder joint pathology
particularly involving concerns regarding secondary soft tissue pathology.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

576

We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 29 articles considered for inclusion, 1 diagnostic study and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE ARTHROGRAM
Magnetic resonance arthrography (MRA) combines and MRI with an arthrogram to
overcome MRI limitations and is usually performed in preference to CT arthrography unless
bony structure definition is needed as well. MRA is particularly thought to be effective for
imaging labral pathology.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE ARTHROGRAM FOR DIAGNOSING SHOULDER OR CLAVICULAR
FRACTURES
Sometimes Recommended
Magnetic resonance arthrography (MRA) is selectively recommended for diagnosing labral
tears in patients with shoulder or clavicular fracture(s).
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Patients with shoulder fracture(s) who also have symptoms of, or clinical suspicion of labral
tears. Patients should generally have failed non-operative treatment of the labral tear or
soft tissue including NSAID and waiting 4 to 6 weeks without trending towards resolution.
Benefits
Secure a diagnosis.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

577

Harms
False positives and false negatives for labral tears. Arthrography improves the accuracy
especially regarding complete rotator cuff tears and significant labral tears. Small risk of
infection and complications from the injection.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
MRA has not been evaluated in quality studies among patients with shoulder fracture(s).
Although studies are heterogeneous, pooled estimates of the sensitivity for full-thickness
tears is estimated at 95% with specificity 93% (Dinnes et al., 2003). There is high prevalence
for labral injury with first shoulder dislocation based on MRA (Antonio et al., 2007).
Arthrography with low-field MR was found to be equivalent to high-field in a series of 38
patients (Loew et al., 2000). A comparison of high- versus low-field MR imaging for SLAP
tears among symptomatic patients found high field superior for diagnosing SLAP (Tung et
al., 2000). The sensitivity of high field MRA was 90% and specificity was 63%, while
sensitivity for low field was 64% and 70% specificity. MRA was found superior to CT
arthrography (CTA) and marginally better than MRI for identification of labral tears in a case
series of patients with recurrent anterior instability, prior anterior dislocation, or shoulder
pain of unknown cause (Chandnani et al., 1993). MRA sensitivity for a labral tear was 96. 4%,
MRI was 92. 9%, and CTA was 73. 1%. Specificity was 100% for all three tests; however, this
appears overstated as there were only two patients without a tear in this small case series.
MR arthrography is invasive, has adverse effects (including a low but definite risk of
infection), and is painful. It is also costly, although MRA is believed to provide better cost
effectiveness than MRI or CT arthrography for select diagnoses (Oh et al., 1999). It is likely
the best imaging procedure available for patients thought to have labral tears or patients
with good strength in order to assess the labrum and rotator cuff with traumatic injury
simultaneously, and is recommended for select use.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

578

bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ULTRASOUND
Diagnostic ultrasound has been used for evaluating rotator cuff tears.
ULTRASOUND FOR DIAGNOSING SHOULDER OR CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
Sometimes Recommended
Ultrasound is selectively recommended for shoulder or clavicular fracture patients also
suspected of having rotator cuff tears, tendinoses, or impingement.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Ultrasound technicians should have sufficient skill to obviate the need for scanning (Boykin
et al., 2010, Hanchard et al., 2013); otherwise, the test introduces unnecessary redundancy.
Patients with shoulder fracture(s) who also have symptoms and signs of a clinically
significant rotator cuff tear, tendinosis, or impingement (Naredo et al., 1999, Iannotti et al.,
2005, Ardic et al., 2006, Wall et al., 2012). Most clinical presentations should wait
approximately 2 weeks prior to imaging as some patients with acute pain and limited range
of motion resolve clinically; obvious tears are an exception to waiting two weeks. Those
with subacute or chronic pain should generally have failed additional non-operative
treatment including NSAID, exercise, and injection(s) (Moosikasuwan et al., 2005,
Ottenheijm et al., 2010). A MR arthrogram is recommended for suspected labral injury (see
below) (Ardic et al., 2006).
Benefits
Secure a diagnosis.
Harms

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

579

False positives and false negatives.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Repeat ultrasound should be based on significant change in symptoms and/or examination
findings.
Rationale
Ultrasound has been compared with physical examination findings, suggesting physical
exam identified fewer abnormalities compared with ultrasound, though there was not
clinical correlation with treatment outcomes (Kim et al., 2007). Ultrasound utilized to
evaluate asymptomatic shoulders found increased prevalence of full-thickness tears with
increased age (Sher et al., 1995, Tempelhof et al., 1999), with approximately 6% among 212
individuals (Schibany et al., 2004) and in 7. 6% of 420 patients (Moosmayer et al., 2009).
Asymptomatic tears increase in prevalence by age – 50 to 59 (2. 1%) versus 60 to 69 (5. 7%)
versus 70 to 79 (15%) (Moosmayer et al., 2009).
Ultrasound is thought to be relatively effective for identifying full-thickness tears (Middleton
et al., 1986, Furtschegger et al., 1988, Mack et al., 1988, Mack et al., 1988, Brenneke et al.,
1992, Iannotti et al., 1996, Zehetgruber et al., 2002, Ottenheijm et al., 2010, Smith et al.,
2011); however, it appears somewhat less effective for identifying partial-thickness tears
(Brenneke et al., 1992, Naredo et al., 1999, Smith et al., 2011). A surgical case series of 42
patients attempted to determine the diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound. Ultrasound
detected all full-thickness tears (100% sensitive, 97% specific), but only 6 of 13 of the
partial-thickness tears (46% sensitive, 97% specific). One full-thickness tear was falsely
diagnosed. Another study has suggested sensitivity for detection of tear size of 83 to 86%.
(Ianotti) Ultrasound has advantages of being able to move the arm actively or passively
during the examination; it is less expensive; and it may be available in most centers. (Boykin,
Friedman et al.) When conservative treatment failed, skilled physician’s usingultrasound
reportedly had high diagnostic accuracy identifying tendinopathy, calcifying tendonitis, and
partial- and full- thickness tears. (Moosikasuwan, Miller et al., Ottenheijm, Jansen et al.)
SLAP lesions cannot be well visualized using ultrasound. (Hanchard, Lenza et al.)
Impingement was felt to have been diagnosed in 27 of 34 cases (79% sensitive, 96% positive
predictive value). (Read and Perko) A small study of ultrasound the day before surgery for
shoulder arthritis in 20 patients suggested that ultrasound was accurate for evaluating
hypertrophy of the bursa (93% sensitive, 83% specific), biceps tendon rupture (70%
sensitive, 100% specific) and rotator cuff tear (83% sensitive, 57% specific ). (Alasaarela,
Leppilahti et al.) Ultrasound-guided MR arthrography was evaluated in an RCT with anterior
versus posterior approaches and found equal ratings of discomfort. (Koivikko and
Mustonen) Ultrasound is not invasive, is of low to moderate cost, and has little risk of
adverse effects; therefore, although there are concerns that MRI may be superior for
imaging most of shoulder soft tissue, ultrasound is recommended particularly for evaluation
of rotator cuff tears as a complication of shoulder fracture(s). The main disadvantage is the
high dependency on the physician’s skills. (Boykin, Friedman et al., Hanchard, Lenza et al.)
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

580

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SINGLE-PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT)
SINGLE-PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT) FOR SHOULDER OR
CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
Not Recommended
Single-proton emission computed tomography (SPECT) is not recommended for the
evaluation of patients with shoulder or clavicular fractures.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain. One study found
SPECT helpful in evaluating patients with inflammatory arthropathies, particularly if there
are concerns about the SI joints (Hanly, 1993). Some data suggest SPECT may outperform
bone scanning. Additional studies are needed to determine if SPECT or PET adds something
to the diagnosis, treatment, and outcomes beyond that obtained by a careful history,
physical examination, plain x-rays, and clinical impression before it can be recommended for
evaluating shoulder disorders.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

581

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET)
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET) FOR SHOULDER OR CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
Not Recommended
Positron emission tomography (PET) is not recommended for the evaluation of patients with
shoulder or clavicular fractures.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain. One study found
SPECT helpful in evaluating patients with inflammatory arthropathies, particularly if there
are concerns about the SI joints (Hanly, 1993). Some data suggest SPECT may outperform
bone scanning. Additional studies are needed to determine if SPECT or PET adds something
to the diagnosis, treatment and outcomes beyond that obtained by a careful history,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

582

physical examination, plain x-rays, and clinical impression before it can be recommended for
evaluating shoulder disorders.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
INITIAL CARE
Initial care of a patient with fracture generally involves preclusion of use, prompt
assessment of the severity, a determination of whether surgery or non-operative
management is best, and education. Identification of accompanying disorders, such as
rotator cuff tear, allows for treatment of a second condition to substantially reduce or
resolve the symptoms. Over-the-counter analgesics, self-applications of heat and ice, and
slings are used to treat non-displaced fractures and manage pain.
OVER-THE-COUNTER (OTC) ANALGESICS FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OR CLAVICULAR
FRACTURES
Recommended
Over-the-counter analgesics are recommended for treatment of shoulder or clavicular
fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

583

Level of confidence High
Indications
Shoulder fractures, usually as adjuncts to other treatments
Benefits
Self-management of the pain
Harms
Negligible for OTC analgesics unless acetaminophen doses exceed 3. 5 g, or the patient has
liver disease or other contraindications
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Analgesics should be used per manufacturer’s recommendations
Indications for discontinuation
Fracture healing, resolution of pain, lack of efficacy, intolerance, complication
Rationale
There are no quality trials evaluating analgesics for managing shoulder fractures. There is
some evidence of delayed fracture healing with NSAIDs. However, analgesics and OTC
NSAIDs are likely helpful and there is some quality evidence for the use of prescription
NSAIDs for other shoulder nociceptive pain (see NSAIDs for rotator cuff tendinopathy). Thus,
they are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

584

PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SELF-APPLICATION OF HEAT OR ICE FOR TREATMENT OF SHOULDER OR CLAVICULAR
FRACTURES
Recommended
Self-application of heat or ice is recommended for treatment of shoulder or clavicular
fractures.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Shoulder fractures, usually as adjuncts to other treatments.
Benefits
Self-management of the pain.
Harms
Possible cold injuries or burns.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Self-applications of ice or heat are typically 3-5 times/day. Ice is more typically used in the
acute phase for fractures.
Indications for discontinuation
Fracture healing, resolution of pain, lack of efficacy, intolerance, complication.
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

585

There are no quality trials evaluating ice or heat for managing shoulder fractures. However,
they may be helpful, have generally negligible adverse effects, are of negligible cost, and
thus they are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MEDICATIONS
Over-the-counter medications may be helpful to manage pain. These especially include
acetaminophen and NSAIDs (1340,1341), with NSAIDs showing greater efficacy, but overall
acetaminophen has a generally greater safety profile. Generally, the only medications
commonly used for fracture patients are NSAIDs and brief, post-operative use of opioids in
select patients. Other medications may be indicated if there is osteopenia.

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Clavicular fractures are mostly managed non-operatively (sling and figure-8 brace) (2198-2201),
while some are managed surgically with various techniques and procedures, including open
reduction internal fixation with plates (2199,2202-2205), pins (2186,2198,2199,2203,2206), wires, and nails
(2191,2199,2203,2207)
. Increased risks for nonunions include increasing age, female sex,
comminution, and displacement (1970). Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound has also been used
to attempt to accelerate healing of these fractures (2208-2218).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

586

NON-OPERATIVE TREATMENT FOR CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
Recommended
Non-operative treatment is recommended for most patients with clavicular fractures,
especially among those with non-displaced fractures. Although non-operative management
is an acceptable treatment option for some patients, most workers with displaced midclavicular fractures may prefer to have operative management due to faster functional
recovery, faster return to work, and lower risk of non-union. Non-operative management is
not recommended for comminuted fractures.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Simple clavicular fractures, typically 2-part that are non-displaced and especially in younger
patients. Selective displaced mid-clavicular fractures have also been shown to be
successfully treated non-operatively (Melean et al., 2015, Ban et al., 2021, Ahrens et al.,
2017, Virtanen et al., 2012). Comminuted mid-shaft fractures are poor candidates for nonoperative management due to nonunion and malunions (Mirzatolooei, 2011). Surgery
appears superior for management of ipsilateral scapular neck and clavicular shaft fractures
(Lin et al., 2015).
Benefits
Typically, the fastest recovery with return of function among those with non-displaced
fractures is achieved with non-operative management. Among worker’s compensation
patients with displaced mid-clavicular fractures, recovery may be faster among those
operatively managed (Melean et al., 2015). Among general patients, recovery is faster with
lower risk of non-union among those surgically treated for displaced midclavicular factures
(Melean et al., 2015, Ban et al., 2021, Ahrens et al., 2017, Virtanen et al., 2012)(Tamaoki et
al., 2017, Hall et al., 2021, Woltz et al., 2017, Robinson et al., 2013, Qvist et al., 2018,
Bhardwaj et al., 2018).
Harms
Negligible among those with non-displaced fractures, unless there are complicating
conditions present, co-morbidities or a more complex fracture. Among those with displaced
mid-clavicular fractures, there is ~10-fold risk of non-union with non-operative compared
with operative management in the RCT data, although long-term outcomes are comparable
(Melean et al., 2015, Ban et al., 2021, Ahrens et al., 2017, Virtanen et al., 2012)(Tamaoki et
al., 2017, Woltz et al., 2017, Bhardwaj et al., 2018). However, large registry data suggest
nonunion rates of 5. 9% among those nonoperatively treated compared with 5-6% among
those operatively treated (Zlowodzki et al., 2005), which raise questions about risks in the
general population compared with centers involved in RCTs. Among those with either 1)
comminuted midshaft fractures or 2) psilateral scapular neck and clavicular shaft fractures,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

587

attempted non-operative management resulted in high rates of nonunion and malunion
(Mirzatolooei, 2011, Lin et al., 2015).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
There is quality evidence from many quality RCTs that some closed displaced midclavicular
fractures may be successfully treated with a sling or other non-operative means (Melean et
al., 2015, Ban et al., 2021, Ahrens et al., 2017, Virtanen et al., 2012)(Tamaoki et al., 2017,
Woltz et al., 2017, Bhardwaj et al., 2018)(Mirzatolooei, 2011, Lin et al., 2015, Judd et al.,
2009, Ersen et al., 2015). Either sling or Figure-8 braces may be used with some evidence
suggesting a simple sling is superior to figure-of eight bracing for midclavicular fractures
(Andersen et al., 1987). Non-displaced fractures can be treated with either, and there is not
a consensus on preferred treatment as the figure-8 allows distal extremity movement (Eiff,
1997, Stanley et al., 1988, Andersen et al., 1987, McCandless et al., 1979, Khan et al., 2009).
A low-quality trial suggested superiority of the addition of kinesiotaping to an arm sling
(Dedeoglu et al., 2022). Slings and braces are used until tenderness and crepitance is
resolved (Eiff, 1997).
Indications for discontinuation
Operative management is indicated among those with nonunion, malunion, or
poor/delayed healing.
Rationale
There is one trial comparing non-operative treatments and evidence in evaluating different
outcome or complication factors is not uniformly in favor of one treatment approach. Thus,
either a simple sling or a figure -8 brace is recommended (Andersen et al., 1987). The
majority of clavicular fractures are believed to not require surgery (Eiff, 1997, Zlowodzki et
al., 2005, Khan et al., 2009, Kim et al., 2008, Jeray, 2007, Denard et al., 2005, Craig, 1990,
Graves et al., 2005, Miller et al., 1992, Quigley, 1950, Smekal et al., 2009). However, a
sizeable minority of these fractures may be better treated with surgery which is often
recommended for all open fractures, and for many patients with neurovascular compromise
(Barbier et al., 1997, Chen et al., 2000, Chen et al., 2002, Connolly et al., 1989, Howard et al.,
1965, Fujita et al., 2001, Miller et al., 1969, Kay et al., 1986, Bateman, 1968), multiple
trauma, floating shoulders, Type II distal fractures and proximal fractures associated with
sternoclavicular dislocations, coracoclavicular ligament disruption (Chen et al., 2002),
malunions, and painful non-unions (Eiff, 1997, Jeray, 2007, Graves et al., 2005, Chen et al.,
2002, Jones et al., 2000).
There is quality evidence from many RCTs that displaced midclavicular fractures achieve the
same long-term outcomes whether treated with a sling or other non-operative means
compared with surgical fixation (Melean et al., 2015, Ban et al., 2021, Ahrens et al., 2017,
Virtanen et al., 2012, Mirzatolooei, 2011, Tamaoki et al., 2017, Hall et al., 2021, Woltz et al.,
2017, Robinson et al., 2013, Qvist et al., 2018, Bhardwaj et al., 2018, Lin et al., 2015, Judd et
al., 2009, Ersen et al., 2015). Most studies suggest contrasting risks of: 1) small but
detectable increased risks of reoperations in the surgical arms (e.g., plate removals), while

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

588

2) also showing higher rates of non-union in the non-operative arms. One trial in worker’s
compensation patients reported faster return to work and function among those treated
operatively (2. 9 vs. 3. 7 months) (Melean et al., 2015). The available evidence shows higher
rates of union in those receiving surgery, but the overall numbers of complications are not
improved with surgery. While the quality evidence in favor of lower non-union and
malunion rates moderately supports surgical approaches, the total numbers of
complications is higher in the operative than non-operative group. Thus, careful
consideration must be used with either approach (Canadian Orthopaedic Trauma Society,
2007, Judd et al., 2009, Smekal et al., 2009, Altamimi et al., 2008).
Comminuted mid-shaft fractures are poor candidates for non-operative management due to
high rates of nonunion and malunions (Mirzatolooei, 2011). Surgery appears superior for
management of ipsilateral scapular neck and clavicular shaft fractures (Lin et al., 2015).

Simple clavicular fractures have excellent healing, full return of function, require minimal
management, and are recommended for non-operative treatment. Among patients with
displaced midclavicular fractures, non-operative management may be selectively
recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 32 articles considered for
inclusion, 15 randomized trails and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SURGICAL TREATMENT FOR CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
Sometimes Recommended
Surgical intervention is moderately recommended for select patients with clavicular
fractures.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence High

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

589

Indications
Surgical indications are largely based on numerous factors that are assessed and evaluated
in aggregate by the orthopedic surgeon, including surgeon’s preferences and experiences,
open fractures, multiple-part fractures, degree of displacement, associated vascular injuries,
polytrauma, increasing age, bone quality, hand dominance, medical comorbidities, bilateral
fractures, neurological loss after penetrating injuries, unacceptable alignment, and failure of
non-operative treatment (Society, 2007, Judd et al., 2009, Smekal et al., 2009, Altamimi et
al., 2008). Fractures of the lateral end of the clavicle are recommended for surgical
treatment. Another consideration is that there is one trial of worker’s compensation
patients with displaced midclavicular fractures, and it showed faster recovery among those
operatively managed compared with non-operative management (Melean et al., 2015).
Benefits
Superior healing and recovery. Reduced risk of infection if the fracture was open. Reduced
risk of nonunion if surgical repaired (Melean et al., 2015, Ban et al., 2021, Ahrens et al.,
2017, Virtanen et al., 2012).
Harms
Surgical complications, infection, adhesive capsulitis. Risk of a second surgical procedure
being needed.
Rationale
The majority of clavicular fractures do not require surgery (Eiff, 1997, Zlowodzki et al., 2005,
Khan et al., 2009, Kim et al., 2008, Jeray, 2007, Denard et al., 2005, Craig, 1990, Graves et
al., 2005, Miller et al., 1992, Quigley, 1950, Smekal et al., 2009, Preston et al., 2009).
However, a sizeable minority of these fractures may be better treated with surgery, which is
often recommended for all open fractures, and for many patients with neurovascular
compromise (Barbier et al., 1997, Chen et al., 2000, Chen et al., 2002, Connolly et al., 1989,
Howard et al., 1965, Fujita et al., 2001, Miller et al., 1969, Kay et al., 1986, Bateman, 1968),
multiple trauma, displaced fractures (Smekal et al., 2009), floating shoulders, Type II distal
fractures and proximal fractures associated with sternoclavicular dislocations,
coracoclavicular ligament disruption (Chen et al., 2002), malunions, and painful non-unions
(Eiff, 1997, Jeray, 2007, Graves et al., 2005, Chen et al., 2002, Jones et al., 2000).
There is evidence from many quality RCTs that displaced midclavicular fractures achieve the
same long-term outcomes whether treated with a sling or other non-operative means
compared with surgical fixation (Melean et al., 2015, Ban et al., 2021, Ahrens et al., 2017,
Judd et al., 2009, Ersen et al., 2015). However, most studies suggest contrasting risks of: 1)
small but detectable increased risks of reoperations in the surgical arms (e.g., plate
removals), while 2) also showing ~10-fold higher rates of non-union in the non-operative
arms. However, large registry data suggest nonunion rates of 5. 9% amongt those
nonoperatively treated compared with 5-6% among those operatively treated (628), which

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

590

raises questions about risks in the general population compared with centers involved in
RCTs. One trial in worker’s compensation patients reported faster return to work and
function among those treated operatively (2. 9 vs. 3. 7 months) (Melean et al., 2015). Thus,
among most worker’s compensation patients, surgery may be preferable to non-operative
management of these fractures, although non-operative management may be acceptable
under select circumstances (e.g., risk of surgery). Surgical fixation of mid-shaft fractures
most commonly involves intramedullary fixation (Grassi et al., 2001, Neviaser et al., 1975)
and plate fixation (Kloen et al., 2009, Graves et al., 2005, Kabak et al., 2004, Bradbury et al.,
1996, Jupiter et al., 1987, Fuglesang et al., 2017, van der Meijden et al., 2015, Hulsmans et
al., 2017, Sohn et al., 2015, Andrade-Silva et al., 2015, King et al., 2019, Zehir et al., 2015,
Calbiyik et al., 2017, Narsaria et al., 2014). While the quality evidence in favor of lower nonunion and malunion rates moderately supports surgical approaches, the total numbers of
complications is higher in the operative than non-operative group. Thus, careful
consideration must be used with either approach (Society, 2007, Judd et al., 2009, Altamimi
et al., 2008, Smekal et al., 2009).
Comminuted mid-shaft fractures are poor candidates for non-operative management due to
high rates of nonunion and malunions (Mirzatolooei, 2011). Surgery appears superior for
management of ipsilateral scapular neck and clavicular shaft fractures (Lin et al., 2015).
Fractures of the lateral end of the clavicle have a high rate of non-union ((Robinson et al.,
2004, Khan et al., 2009). Type II fractures of the distal third of the clavicle (Neer, 1968)
(coracoclavicular ligaments remain attached to distal fragment and proximal fragment
displaced superiorly) are recommended for referral to an orthopedist for consideration of
operative treatment due to high rates of non-union (Eskola et al., 1987, Eiff, 1997, Zenni et
al., 1981, Anderson, 2003, Edwards et al., 1992, Post, 1989, Katznelson et al., 1976,
Poigenfurst et al., 1992, Wang et al., 2020, Orlandi et al., 2022, Yan et al., 2017). Fractures of
the proximal 1/3 of the clavicle with either significant displacement or sternoclavicular
dislocation are recommended for referral to an orthopedist (Eiff, 1997).
Treatment for simple displaced fractures remains controversial (Melean et al., 2015, Ban et
al., 2021, Ahrens et al., 2017, Judd et al., 2009, Ersen et al., 2015, Khan et al., 2009). There
are some trials of more complex clavicular fracture management. There are many
indications for surgical management, although the vast majority of clavicular fractures are
able to be managed non-operatively. Surgical management is recommended for these many
indications (see common examples above).
Mid-shaft fractures are fixed with either intramedullary screws/pins or plates with screws;
however, there are few quality trials comparing the different options. Thus, the overall
evidence is not definitive. There are many studies of biomechanical responses to assess risks
of fracture (Kemper et al., 2009), as well as failure of surgical fixation (Robertson et al.,
2009, Celestre et al., 2008, Proubasta et al., 2002). Importantly, these failure rates might be
more important for patients with higher physical activities.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

591

randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 1 from other sources. Of the 33 articles considered for
inclusion, 33 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

REHABILITATION PROGRAMS
Supervised therapy is infrequently needed for clavicular fractures (2219). Exceptions may
include complicated fractures, fractures in the elderly, or fractures in patients with
comorbidities.
LOW-INTENSITY PULSED ULTRASOUND FOR TREATMENT OF TYPE I CLAVICULAR
FRACTURES
Not Recommended
Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound is moderately not recommended for treatment of Type I
(mid-shaft) clavicular fractures.
Strength of evidence Moderately Not Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
One high-quality RCT of Type I clavicle (diaphyseal) fractures found no evidence of efficacy
of ultrasound to accelerate healing (Lubbert et al., 2008). Thus, this intervention is not
recommended for those fractures. However, favorable results reported for healing
disparate nonunion fracture types in uncontrolled studies (Nolte et al., 2001) and some
evidence for other fractures (Busse, 2009) does suggest that there may be some role for
low-intensity pulsed ultrasound for select clavicle fractures that has not yet been defined
but, if successful, may involve more severe fracture types, risks for non-unions, or postoperative settings with risks of non-union.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

592

17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 32 articles considered for
inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
LOW-INTENSITY PULSED ULTRASOUND FOR TREATMENT OF NON-TYPE 1 CLAVICULAR
FRACTURES
No Recommendation
Post-operative use of low-intensity pulsed ultrasound is not recommended for treatment of
all other (non-Type 1) clavicle fractures or non-unions.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
One high-quality RCT of Type I clavicle (diaphyseal) fractures found no evidence of efficacy
of ultrasound to accelerate healing (Lubbert et al., 2008). Thus, this intervention is not
recommended for those fractures. However, favorable results reported for healing
disparate nonunion fracture types in uncontrolled studies and some evidence for other
fractures (Busse, 2009) does suggest that there may be some role for low-intensity pulsed
ultrasound for select clavicle fractures that has not yet been defined but, if successful, may
involve more severe fracture types, risks for non-unions, or post-operative settings with
risks of non-union.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

593

reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
EARLY MOBILIZATION FOR CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
Sometimes Recommended
Early mobilization is selectively recommended for clavicular fractures, post-surgical patients
and/or among those with co-morbidities.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Select patients with complex clavicular fractures, post-surgical patients and/or among those
with co-morbidities.
Benefits
Earlier and improved return to function.
Harms
Theoretical aggravation of a fracture if begun before sufficiently healed.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
The goal is to begin range of motion as early as possible to help prevent stiffness. Frequent
follow-up may help to transition the patient from immobilization to motion. Begin range of
motion once fracture is stable (very early for stable impacted fractures). Other fractures can
wait until the clavicle moves as if it is one unit- up to four weeks for most fractures. Treating
orthopedist must ascertain whether early mobilization is appropriate. Considerations
include patient age, fracture type, post-reduction or post-surgical results, comorbidities.
Early mobilization generally starts within 1 week.
Rationale
There are no quality studies of clavicular fractures, but multiple trials of proximal humeral
fractures suggesting efficacy of early mobilization . (Hodgson et al., 2007, Hodgson et al.,
2003, Lefevre-Colau et al., 2007, Agorastides et al., 2007)(Kristiansen et al., 1989). Thus, by
analogy to proximal humeral fractures, early mobilization is not invasive, appears to have
few adverse effects, is likely cost-effective, and thus recommended for complex clavicular
fractures, post-surgical patients and/or among those with co-morbidities.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

594

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
EDUCATION AND EXERCISES FOR CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
Sometimes Recommended
Education and exercise are selectively recommended for complex clavicular fractures, postsurgical patients, and/or among those with co-morbidities.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Select patients with complex clavicular fractures, post-surgical patients, and/or among those
with co-morbidities.
Benefits
Improved compliance with the rehabilitation program and faster return of function.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Education may include adaptive techniques and use of adaptive equipment (as indicated) to
facilitate continued participation in daily activities despite limitations of shoulder.
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

595

There are no quality studies of clavicular fractures, but multiple trials of proximal humeral
fractures suggesting efficacy of education and exercises (Kristiansen et al., 1989, Hodgson et
al., 2003, Lefevre-Colau et al., 2007, Hodgson et al., 2007, Agorastides et al., 2007). Thus, by
analogy to proximal humeral fractures, education and exercises are not invasive, appear to
have few adverse effects, are likely cost-effective, and thus are recommended for complex
clavicular fractures, post-surgical patients, and/or among those with co-morbidities.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SELF-TRAINING FOR CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
Sometimes Recommended
Self-training exercise is selectively recommended for those with clavicular fractures, postsurgical patients and/or among those with co-morbidities.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

596

Select patients with complex clavicular fractures, post-surgical patients, and/or among those
with co-morbidities who are motivated and compliant with exercises to rehabilitate the
injury (Lungberg et al., 1979, Bertoft et al., 1984, Revay et al., 1992).
Rationale
There are no quality studies of clavicular fractures, but multiple trials of proximal humeral
fractures suggesting efficacy of early mobilization (Lungberg et al., 1979, Bertoft et al., 1984,
Revay et al., 1992).
Thus, by analogy to proximal humeral fractures, self-training is not invasive, appears to have
few adverse effects, likely cost-effective, and thus is recommended for complex clavicular
fractures, post-surgical patients and/or among those with co-morbidities.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: shoulder fractures, shoulder fracture;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,782 articles in PubMed, 39,900 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 27 from PubMed, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: clavicle fractures bone, clavicular fractures
bone, clavicle fractures, clavicular fractures; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 1,280 articles in PubMed,
17,100 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 32 from
PubMed, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

FOLLOW-UP VISITS
Patients with clavicular fractures generally require a few follow-up appointments as the
prognosis is mostly excellent. Appointments are needed for monitoring symptoms,
advancing treatment, advancing activities, and gradually reducing limitations. For those
patients needing surgery, there are far more apointments needed and/or there are needs to
treat a co-existent condition. Frequencies of appointments may also be greater if workplace

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

597

limitations are required and job demands are higher or may require job modifications or
adaptive equipment. Post-operative rehabilitation can be considerable, particularly in older
patients with other associated injuries such as rotator cuff injuries. In those cases, there
may be a requirement for therapy on a prolonged basis to recover as much function as
possible.

BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The following section contains recommendations for evaluating and managing brachial
plexus injuries from the Evidence-Based Shoulder Disorders Panel. These recommendations
are based on critically appraised higher-quality research evidence or, when such evidence
was unavailable or inconsistent, on expert consensus as required in ACOEM’s Methodology.
Recommendations are made under the following categories:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Strongly Recommended, “A” Level
Moderately Recommended, “B” Level
Recommended, “C” Level
Insufficient – Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – No Recommendation (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – Not Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Not Recommended, “C” Level
Moderately Not Recommended, “B” Level
Strongly Not Recommended, “A” Level

OVERVIEW
Brachial plexopathies among workers have many, mostly high-force causes including motor
vehicle accidents, sporting activities (especially football), bicycle accidents, industrial
accidents, falls from heights, objects falling on a shoulder, and sequelae of fractures.
However, there are many other causes including birth palsies, use of backpacks (Rucksack
paralysis), autoimmune neuropathies, infections, space occupying vascular lesions,
hematomas from axillary artery punctures and procedures, sequelae of orthopedic shoulder
or chest procedures, and primary tumors, metastases and post-radiation (261,631,2220-2233).
Brachial plexus injuries from trauma in the context of work are considered occupational
(631,2234)
. Moderate to severe brachial plexus injuries previously had poor prognoses and
remotely, amputation was sometimes performed (2235). More recent results are considerably
more promising. Only brachial plexopathy due to injuries will be reviewed in this section.
Thoracic outlet syndrome is addressed in a separate module.
Brachial plexus injuries are quite heterogenous, ranging from mild “burner” or “stinger”
football injuries (176) to complete avulsions of nerve roots (2236). Depending on the degree of
axonal damage, the prognoses vary from excellent to poor (2236). These injuries have been
divided into supraclavicular and infraclavicular injuries based on the main location of the
injury as proximal or distal to nerve branches (631), with the supraclavicular thought to be
more severe and more painful (2234). Case series suggest most of these injuries occur in
young males involved in motor vehicle accidents (2234,2237). They are frequently accompanied
by other injuries including concussions, other head trauma, rib fractures, shoulder girdle

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

598

fractures, shoulder dislocations, humeral fractures, cervical spine injuries, and internal
thoracic injuries, suggesting an associated death rate of 3. 7% for those presenting to a
regional trauma facility (2234); many additional mild or isolated cases are not treated in
trauma facilities.
Clinical suspicion leading to a careful history and focused physical examination is usually
diagnostic (631,2236). Weakness is present, sometimes with pain (631). Evaluating traumatic
cases often involves x-ray to screen for fractures, potentially including the humerus, clavicle,
scapula, cervical spine, and chest (631,2236). Computerized tomography, sometimes with
myelography, may be helpful in select cases for imaging the spine (2236). However, MRI is
generally the imaging procedure of choice after fractures have been ruled out or if
additional studies are necessary (631,2236,2238-2241). Electrodiagnostic studies are thought to be
confirmatory in moderate to severely affected patients when performed at least 3 to 4
weeks after the injury to allow sufficient time for Wallerian degeneration (631,2236).
Electrodiagnostics are also used for intraoperative assessments (2236).

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
LABORATORY TESTS
LABORATORY TESTS FOR NEUROPATHIC PAIN
Recommended
Laboratory tests are selectively recommended as a screen to evaluate specific disorders
(e.g., diabetes mellitus, alcohol) that may cause or contribute to peripheral neuropathic
pain.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Patients with ongoing peripheral neuropathic pain that is not responding clinically as
expected, including brachial plexopathies, and without prior diagnostic evaluations.
Diagnostic testing should generally include fasting glucose and either hemoglobin A1c
and/or 2-hour glucose tolerance testing. The threshold should be low for testing for signs of
alcohol abuse (i.e., CBC with Mean Cell Volume, GGTP, AST and ALT). Testing is advisable
even if other diagnostic testing finds another disorder (e.g., occupational neurotoxin) to
assure there is not a treatable contributing factor.
Benefits
Diagnosing a latent condition. As there is evidence that multiple disorders interact to raise
risk of neuropathy, addressing all causes is also thought to produce a more favorable
prognosis.
Harms
Negligible.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

599

Frequency/Dose/Duration
One evaluation. A second evaluation may be indicated when either there is a significant
change in exposure (e.g., substantial weight gain) or symptoms change.
Rationale
Diabetes mellitus (or pre-diabetes/glucose intolerance) and alcohol abuse are important to
treat to facilitate improvements in peripheral neuropathic pain. Serological tests are
minimally invasive, unlikely to have substantial adverse effects, are low to moderately costly
depending on the specific test ordered, have evidence of diagnostic efficacy and are thus
recommended for focused testing of a few diagnostic considerations.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, CINAHL, Cochrane Library,
and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: X-Ray, Radiography,
Diagnostic Imaging; brachial plexus; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive
predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and efficiency.
We found and reviewed 6,059 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a
secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 6,059 articles, 23 in
CINAHL, 213 in Cochrane Library, 32,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

X-RAYS
RADIOGRAPHS (X-RAYS) TO DIAGNOSE BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
Recommended
Laboratory tests are selectively recommended as a screen to evaluate specific disorders
(e.g., diabetes mellitus, alcohol) that may cause or contribute to peripheral neuropathic
pain.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

600

Most patients with brachial plexus injuries are candidates for cervical spine and/or shoulder
x-rays, especially for significant trauma, pain without trending towards improvement,
impaired use, and those with red flags.
Benefits
Diagnosis of a fracture, calcific tendinitis, or otherwise latent medical condition(s).
Harms
Medicalization or worsening of otherwise benign shoulder condition; minor radiation
exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining x-rays once is generally sufficient with two to three views of the cervical spine
and/or shoulder. For patients with chronic pain, it may be reasonable to obtain a second set
of cervical spine and/or shoulder x-rays later to re-evaluate the patient’s condition,
particularly if symptoms change.
Rationale
X-rays are helpful to evaluate most patients with brachial plexus-related, both to diagnose
and to assist with the differential diagnostic possibilities such as fractures and arthroses
(Harreld et al., 2009, Ficat, 1985). X-rays are non-invasive, low to moderate costly, and have
little risk of adverse effects, and therefore are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, CINAHL, Cochrane Library,
and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: X-Ray, Radiography,
Diagnostic Imaging; brachial plexus; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive
predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and efficiency.
We found and reviewed 6,059 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a
secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 6,059 articles, 23 in
CINAHL, 213 in Cochrane Library, 32,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

601

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Computed tomography remains an important imaging procedure, particularly for bony
anatomy, whereas MRI is superior for soft tissue abnormalities. However, most patients
have issues with soft tissue rather than bony abnormalities in the shoulder, thus on a
population-basis, far fewer CT scans are ordered. CT may nevertheless be useful for
shoulder joint abnormalities where advanced imaging of the bones is required (i.e., complex
proximal humerus fracture, scapular fracture). CT also may be useful to evaluate the
anatomy in patients with contraindications for MRI (most typically an implanted metallicferrous device). CT arthrogram is often preferred when evaluating posterior or anterior
glenohumeral instability when the bony anatomy needs to be better defined – glenoid
deficiency and humeral Hill-Sachs – as MRI is not as good for bone imaging. CT arthrogram
can be used in place of MRI to evaluate for rotator cuff tear.

CT MYELOGRAPHY TO DIAGNOSE BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
Sometimes Recommended
CT myelography is selectively recommended for the evaluation of brachial plexus injuries.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Patients thought to have an acute, clinically significant brachial plexus injury who also have
concerns for osseous injury (e.g., cervical spine) and/or potentially confounding conditions
with a contraindication for MRI (e.g., ferrous implant). CT myelography is generally superior
to CT for evaluation of plexopathy cases and is helpful to identify nerve root lesions.
Benefits
Secure a diagnosis and that of a confounding condition.
Harms
Negligible, radiation exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

602

There are no quality trials on the use of CT to evaluate brachial plexus injuries. However,
there are studies of CT myelography and data conflict regarding whether CT myelography is
superior to MRI (Bordalo-Rodrigues et al., 2020, Carvalho et al., 1997) or whether the two
imaging techniques have comparable rates of detection of cervical nerve root avulsion (Van
der Linde et al., 2015, Doi et al., 2002). These injuries are disparate in nature and require an
individualized approach, particularly for the more severe cases. MRI is considered superior
to CT for imaging most neck/shoulder abnormalities where advanced imaging of soft tissues
is usually the primary concern. However, where imaging calcified structures is required, CT
is considered superior. This includes complex and occult fractures. CT arthrogram can be
used in place of MRI to evaluate for rotator cuff tear. CT myelography is helpful for
evaluation of plexopathies. CT is also helpful for imaging of potentially confounding injuries
such as osseous injuries and occult fractures, and thus for most brachial plexus injuries, MRI
is considered the best imaging tool available and so CT is only selectively recommended. CT
myelography however has a more central role in evaluation of these injuries.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 42 articles considered for inclusion, 5 diagnostic studies and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (CT) TO DIAGNOSE BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
Sometimes Recommended
Computed tomography (without myelography) is selectively recommended for the
evaluation of brachial plexus injuries.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Patients thought to have an acute, clinically significant brachial plexus injury who also have
concerns for osseous injury (e.g., cervical spine) and/or potentially confounding conditions

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

603

with a contraindication for MRI (e.g., ferrous implant). CT myelography is generally superior
to CT for evaluation of plexopathy cases and is helpful to identify nerve root lesions.
Benefits
Secure a diagnosis and that of a confounding condition.
Harms
Negligible, radiation exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
There are no quality trials on the use of CT to evaluate brachial plexus injuries. However,
there are studies of CT myelography, and data conflict regarding whether CT myelography is
superior to MRI (Bordalo-Rodrigues et al., 2020, Carvalho et al., 1997) or whether the two
imaging techniques have comparable rates of detection of cervical nerve root avulsion (Doi
et al., 2002, Van der Linde et al., 2015). These injuries are disparate in nature and require an
individualized approach, particularly for the more severe cases. MRI is considered superior
to CT for imaging most neck/shoulder abnormalities where advanced imaging of soft tissues
is usually the primary concern. However, where imaging calcified structures is required, CT
is considered superior. This includes complex and occult fractures. CT arthrogram can be
used in place of MRI to evaluate for rotator cuff tear. CT myelography is helpful for
evaluation of plexopathies. CT is helpful for imaging of potentially confounding injuries such
as osseous injuries and occult fractures, and thus for most brachial plexus injuries, MRI is
considered the best imaging tool available and so CT is only selectively recommended. CT
myelography however has a more central role in evaluation of these injuries.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

604

we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ELECTROMYOGRAPHY (INCLUDING NERVE CONDUCTION STUDIES)
See the ACOEM Cervical and Thoracic Spine Disorders and Hand, Wrist, and Forearm
Disorders for discussions regarding use of electrodiagnostic studies for evaluation of cervical
spine and distal upper extremity-related disorders that may present as shoulder pain.
Electrodiagnostic studies have also been used to confirm diagnostic impressions of other
peripheral nerve entrapments, brachial plexopathies, and neurologic component of thoracic
outlet syndrome.
ELECTROMYOGRAPHY AND NERVE CONDUCTION STUDIES TO DIAGNOSE BRACHIAL
PLEXUS INJURIES
Recommended
Electrodiagnostic studies are recommended to assist in the diagnosis of subacute or chronic
brachial plexus injuries, as well as injuries to the long thoracic nerve and suprascapular
nerve.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Patients with subacute or chronic paresthesias with or without pain, particularly when the
diagnosis is unclear. As EMG abnormalities require at least 3 weeks to develop changes,
indications require failure to resolve or trend towards resolution after waiting 4 to 6 weeks
(which also allows for potential clinical improvement), equivocal imaging findings such as CT
or MRI, and suspicion by history and physical examination that a brachial plexopathy and/or
radiculopathy may be present and there is a need to define the disorder with an anticipated
potential need to change the treatment approach.
Benefits
Identification of neurological disorders, including plexopathy, radiculopathy, and peripheral
nerve entrapment.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally only one test is needed. If the test is obtained too early, a repeat study may be
needed if symptoms persist or progress to ascertain whether the test becomes abnormal
with time.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

605

Rationale
Electrodiagnostic studies may assist in confirming peripheral nerve entrapments such as the
long thoracic nerve and suprascapular nerve. These studies are minimally invasive, have
minimal potential for adverse effects, and are moderate to high cost depending on the
extent of the testing required.
Two comparative studies suggest nerve conduction studies are superior to MRI for the
detection of plexus injuries (Caporrino et al., 2014, Chanlalit et al., 2005). Electrodiagnostic
studies are considered to have a central role in the evaluation of brachial plexus injuries,
there is evidence of their utility, and thus, they are recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, CINAHL, Cochrane Library,
and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Electromyography, EMG;
brachial plexus; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value,
negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and efficiency. We found and
reviewed 3,543 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in
PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 3,543 articles, 13 in CINAHL, 27 in
Cochrane Library, 12,200 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for
inclusion 2 from PubMed, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 1 from Google Scholar,
and 0 from other sources. Of the 3 articles considered for inclusion, 3 diagnostic studies and
0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING TO DIAGNOSE BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
Recommended
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is recommended for patients suspected of having acute,
clinically significant brachial plexus injuries. It is also recommended for select patients with
subacute or chronic shoulder pain thought to potentially confounding conditions such as a
symptomatic rotator cuff tear.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

606

Patients thought to have an acute, clinically significant brachial plexus injury. MRI is also
helpful for those injury cases where other confounding conditions may be present, such as
cervical radiculopathy or rotator cuff injury. An MRI order would require specification of the
body part(s) to be imaged.
Benefits
Secure a diagnosis and that of a confounding condition.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed, and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
MRI has reported 39-96% sensitivity and 26-95% specificity for the detection of brachial
plexus injury compared with surgical results (Hems et al., 1999, Tagliafico et al., 2012, Gad
et al., 2020, Hung et al., 2020, Veronesi et al., 2018, Acharya et al., 2020, Trung, 2021, Ochi
et al., 1994, Zhang et al., 2018, Gerevini et al., 2008). MRI also has 79% sensitivity for
cervical nerve root avulsion compared with surgical results (788). Data conflict regarding
whether CT myelography is superior to MRI (Bordalo-Rodrigues et al., 2020, Carvalho et al.,
1997) or whether the two imaging techniques have comparable rates of detection of
cervical nerve root avulsion (Doi et al., 2002, Van der Linde et al., 2015). Comparable images
are obtained, although with faster acquisition, with 3-dimensional isotropic resolution fast
spin echo MRI compared with conventional MRI (Tagliafico et al., 2012). Axial T2-drive MRI
myelography was found 100% sensitive and 97% specific compared with surgical exploration
(Elsakka et al., 2022), and 3D MR myelography is reportedly 89% sensitive and 95% specific
for detection of avulsed nerve roots (Gasparotti et al., 1997). 3D diffusion-weighted steadystate free precession high resolution MRI is reportedly 97% sensitive and 90% specific for
the detection of brachial plexus injuries (Qin et al., 2016). Two comparative studies suggest
nerve conduction studies are superior to MRI for the detection of plexus injuries (Caporrino
et al., 2014, Chanlalit et al., 2005). A study of US found MRI was overall superior and there
was only limited utility of US compared with MRI (Caldana et al., 2018).
MR neurography has also been used to evaluate brachial plexus injuries (Fisher et al., 2016,
Crim et al., 2017, Sneag et al., 2020, Mabrouk et al., 2021, Du et al., 2010). The sensitivity
was reported to be 41-71% and specificity was 97-100% (Crim et al., 2017). However, the
comparisons do not include findings based on surgery.
These injuries are disparate in nature and require an individualized diagnostic approach,
particularly for the more severe cases. MRI is considered the best imaging test for soft

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

607

tissues. MRI is also helpful for evaluation of potentially confounding injuries such as rotator
cuff. Thus, for most brachial plexus injuries, MRI is considered the best imaging tool
available and is recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, CINAHL, Cochrane Library,
and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Magnetic Resonance
Imaging, MRI; brachial plexus; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive
predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and efficiency.
We found and reviewed 2113 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a
secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 2113 articles, 78 in
CINAHL, 32 in Cochrane Library, 24200 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 37 from PubMed, 4 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 16 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 57 articles considered for inclusion, 54
diagnostic studies and 3 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE NEUROGRAPHY FOR DIAGNOSING BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
Recommended
Magnetic resonance neurography (MRN) is recommended for patients suspected of having
acute, clinically significant brachial plexus injuries. It is also recommended for select patients
with subacute or chronic shoulder pain thought to potentially confounding conditions such
as a symptomatic rotator cuff tear.
Strength of evidence Moderately Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Patients thought to have an acute, clinically significant brachial plexus injury. MRN is also
helpful for those injury cases where other confounding conditions may be present, such as
cervical radiculopathy or rotator cuff injury. An MRN order would require specification of
the body part(s) to be imaged.
Benefits
Secure a diagnosis and that of a confounding condition.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

608

Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second study is rarely needed and should be based on significant changes in symptoms
and examination.
Rationale
MRN has reported 39-96% sensitivity and 26-95% specificity for the detection of brachial
plexus injury compared with surgical results (Hems et al., 1999, Tagliafico et al., 2012, Gad
et al., 2020, Hung et al., 2020, Veronesi et al., 2018, Acharya et al., 2020)(Trung, 2021,
Zhang et al., 2018, Gerevini et al., 2008). MRI also has 79% sensitivity for cervical nerve root
avulsion compared with surgical results (Wade et al., 2018). Data conflict regarding whether
CT myelography is superior to MRI (Bordalo-Rodrigues et al., 2020, Carvalho et al., 1997) or
whether the two imaging techniques have comparable rates of detection of cervical nerve
root avulsion (Doi et al., 2002, Van der Linde et al., 2015). Comparable images are obtained,
although with faster acquisition, with 3-dimensional isotropic resolution fast spin echo MRI
compared with conventional MRI (Tagliafico et al., 2012). Axial T2-drive MRI myelography
was found 100% sensitive and 97% specific compared with surgical exploration (Elsakka et
al., 2022), and 3D MR myelography is reportedly 89% sensitive and 95% specific for
detection of avulsed nerve roots (Gasparotti et al., 1997). 3D diffusion-weighted steadystate free precession high resolution MRI is reportedly 97% sensitive and 90% specific for
the detection of brachial plexus injuries (Qin et al., 2016). Two comparative studies suggest
nerve conduction studies are superior to MRI for the detection of plexus injuries (Caporrino
et al., 2014, Chanlalit et al., 2005). A study of US found MRI was overall superior and there
was only limited utility of US compared with MRI (Caldana et al., 2018).

MR neurography has also been used to evaluate brachial plexus injuries (Fisher et al., 2016,
Crim et al., 2017, Sneag et al., 2020, Mabrouk et al., 2021, Du et al., 2010). The sensitivity is
reported as 41-71% and specificity 97-100% (Crim et al., 2017). However, the comparisons
do not include findings based on surgery.
These injuries are disparate in nature and require an individualized diagnostic approach,
particularly for the more severe cases. MRI/MRN is considered the best imaging test for soft
tissues, MRI is also helpful for evaluation of potentially confounding injuries such as rotator
cuff, and thus for most brachial plexus injuries, MRI/MRN is considered the best imaging
tool available and is thus recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

609

trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 42 articles considered for inclusion, 5 diagnostic studies and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ULTRASOUND
ULTRASOUND TO DIAGNOSE BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
Not Recommended
Ultrasound is not recommended for evaluation of brachial plexus injuries. There are other
indications for its use.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
A study found MRI was generally superior to ultrasound, which had limited utility compared
with MRI (Caldana et al., 2018). Because there is no clear rationale for its use in the
evaluation of brachial plexus injuries and evidence of inferiority, ultrasound is not
recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, CINAHL, Cochrane Library,
and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Ultrasound,
Ultrasonography; brachial plexus; diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive
predictive value, negative predictive value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and efficiency.
We found and reviewed 6,213 articles in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a
secondary search in PubMed using Best Match tab to find and review 6,213 articles, 94 in
CINAHL, 397 in Cochrane Library, 22,800 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We
considered for inclusion 1 from PubMed, 1 from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 2 from
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 4 articles considered for inclusion, 3
diagnostic studies and 1 systematic review met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

610

review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SINGLE-PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT)
SINGLE-PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT) TO DIAGNOSE BRACHIAL
PLEXUS INJURIES
Not Recommended
Single-proton emission computed tomography (SPECT) is not recommended for the
evaluation of patients with brachial plexus injuries.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain including brachial
plexus injuries. One study found SPECT helpful in evaluating patients with inflammatory
arthropathies, particularly if there are concerns about the SI joints (Hanly, 1993). Some data
suggest SPECT may outperform bone scanning. Additional studies are needed to determine
if SPECT or PET adds something to the diagnosis, treatment and outcomes beyond that
obtained by a careful history, physical examination, plain x-rays, and clinical impression
before it can be recommended for evaluating shoulder disorders including brachial plexus
injuries.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, CINAHL, Cochrane Library,
and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Positron Emisson
Tomography, Single-Photon Emission-Computed Tomography, PET, SPECT; brachial plexus;
diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive
value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and efficiency. We found and reviewed 114 articles
in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best
Match tab to find and review 114 articles, 1 in CINAHL, 214 in Cochrane Library, 3,310 in
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources.
Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

611

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET)
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET) TO DIAGNOSE BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
Not Recommended
Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning is not recommended for the evaluation of
patients with brachial plexus injuries.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain including brachial
plexus injuries. One study found SPECT helpful in evaluating patients with inflammatory
arthropathies, particularly if there are concerns about the SI joints (Hanly, 1993). Some data
suggest SPECT may outperform bone scanning. Additional studies are needed to determine
if SPECT or PET adds something to the diagnosis, treatment and outcomes beyond that
obtained by a careful history, physical examination, plain x-rays, and clinical impression
before it can be recommended for evaluating shoulder disorders including brachial plexus
injuries.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, CINAHL, Cochrane Library,
and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Positron Emission
Tomography, Single-Photon Emission-Computed Tomography, PET, SPECT; brachial plexus;
diagnosis, diagnostic, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive
value, predictive value of tests, efficacy, and efficiency. We found and reviewed 114 articles
in PubMed using Most Recent tab, and we did a secondary search in PubMed using Best
Match tab to find and review 114 articles, 1 in CINAHL, 214 in Cochrane Library, 3,310 in
Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources.
Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

612

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
MEDICATIONS
Mild cases of brachial plexopathy, such as mild football traction injuries, have an excellent
prognosis with non-operative treatment (176,631,2236). Provided the extent of axonal damage is
minimal, non-operative treatment has been recommended (631,2236). In the absence of
quality evidence, these mild injuries should be treated as neuropathic pain (see
recommendations in the ACOEM Chronic Pain Guideline). Briefly, recommended
medications include NSAIDs (Evidence C); concomitant use of cytoprotective agents in
patients with a high risk factor profile who also have indications for NSAIDs (Evidence C);
acetaminophen particularly if NSAIDs are contraindicated (Evidence C); tricyclic antidepressants (Evidence C); carbamazepine as a potential adjunct as a 4th- or 5th-line
treatment for neuropathic pain (Evidence C); carbamazepine as a potential adjunct as a
fourth- or fifth-line treatment (Evidence I); gabapentin and pregabalin (Evidence A);
dextromethorphan for select patients (Evidence C); muscle relaxants for brief use as a 2ndor 3rd- line agent in acute exacerbations (Evidence I); and opioids for select patients
(Evidence I).

ALLIED HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
Self-applications of heat or cryotherapies may be helpful for symptom modulation and are
recommended to treat brachial plexus injuries. Therapy including education and exercise is
also recommended. Acupuncture and other physical methods such as massage, diathermy,
and magnets have been used to treat shoulder pain that includes brachial plexus injuries.
ACUPUNCTURE FOR TREATMENT OF CHRONIC PAIN FROM BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
Not Recommended
Acupuncture is not recommended to control chronic pain associated with brachial plexus
injuries.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Trials of acupuncture to treat neuropathic pain have not shown success. Thus, acupuncture
is not recommended for treatment of brachial plexopathies. See also the ACOEM Chronic
Pain Guideline.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, CINAHL, Cochrane Library,
and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Acupuncture,
Acupuncture Therapy; brachial plexus; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 46 articles in PubMed, 3 in CINAHL, 67 in Cochrane Library, 9160 in

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

613

Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from PubMed, 0
from CINAHL, 0 from Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources.
Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
DIATHERMY FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of diathermy for the treatment of
brachial plexopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of diathermy
for treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
INFRARED THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
No Recommendation

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

614

There is no recommendation for or against the use of infrared therapy, for the treatment of
brachial plexopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no recommendation for or against the use of infrared therapy, for the treatment of
brachial plexopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANUAL THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of manual therapy for the treatment of
brachial plexopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of manual
therapy for treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

615

controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANIPULATION FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of manipulation for the treatment of
brachial plexopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
manipulation for treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

616

MASSAGE FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of massage for the treatment of brachial
plexopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of massage
for treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ELECTRICAL THERAPIES
HIGH-VOLTAGE GALVANIC STIMULATION FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of high-voltage galvanic stimulation for
the treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of highvoltage galvanic stimulation for treatment of brachial plexopathies.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

617

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
H-WAVE® DEVICE STIMULATION FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of H-Wave® Device Stimulation for the
treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of H-Wave®
Device Stimulation for treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

618

we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
IONTOPHORESIS FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of iontophoresis for the treatment of
brachial plexopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
iontophoresis for treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MICROCURRENT FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of microcurrent for the treatment of
brachial plexopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

619

There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
microcurrent for treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PERCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION (PENS) FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL
PLEXUS INJURIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of percutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (PENS) for the treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of PENS for
treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

620

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SYMPATHETIC ELECTROTHERAPY FOR BRACHIAL PLEXOPATHIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of sympathetic electrotherapy for the
treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
TRANSCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL STIMULATION (TENS) FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL
PLEXUS INJURIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of transcutaneous electrical stimulation
(TENS) for the treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

621

There is no quality evidence and thus there is no recommendation for the use of
transcutaneous electrical stimulation (TENS) for treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PULSED ELECTROMAGNETIC
FREQUENCY FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
Not Recommended
Pulsed electromagnetic frequency is not recommended for the treatment of brachial
plexopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence of efficacy and there is evidence suggesting inefficacy for other
shoulder disorders. Thus, pulsed electromagnetic frequency is not recommended for
treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

622

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
INTERFERENTIAL THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
Not Recommended
Interferential therapy is not recommended for the treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence of efficacy and there is evidence suggesting inefficacy for other
shoulder disorders. Thus, interferential therapy is not recommended for treatment of
brachial plexopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

DEVICES
TAPING FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
Not Recommended
Taping is not recommended for the treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

623

Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence of efficacy and there is evidence suggesting inefficacy for other
shoulder disorders. Thus, taping is not recommended for treatment of brachial
plexopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MAGNETS FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
Not Recommended
Magnets are not recommended for the treatment of brachial plexopathies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no quality evidence of efficacy and there is evidence suggesting inefficacy for other
shoulder disorders. Thus, magnets are not recommended for treatment of brachial
plexopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

624

We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 42 articles considered for inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PERIPHERAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for peripheral magnetic stimulation for the treatment of
brachial plexopathies.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Patients with inadequate improvements with strengthening exercises, therapy, medications
over at least 4 weeks (Khedr et al., 2012).
Benefits
Improvements in pain and function.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
10 treatment sessions. The sole trial administered 1 daily treatment for 5 days per week for
2 weeks (Khedr et al., 2012).
Rationale
There is one sham-controlled trial of 10 treatment sessions of peripheral magnetic
stimulation for treatment of brachial plexus injuries which suggested significant efficacy,
with improvements persisting for 30 days after completion of treatments (Khedr et al.,
2012). As there is pilot study suggesting some limited efficacy which has not yet been
reproduced, there is no recommendation and further studies are clearly indicated for both

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

625

rTMS and tDCS. Among those unresponsive to other treatments, this may be a
consideration.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

INJECTION THERAPY
Diagnostic injections particularly of the subacromial space, glenohumeral joint and
acromioclavicular joint are sometimes performed. However, they are nearly always
performed in combination with a therapeutic intervention, such as a glucocorticosteroid
injection. Injection with a therapeutic agent is nearly always preferable due to less overall
invasiveness with 1 injection rather than 2, as well as the potential to assess the patient
both immediately post-injection for diagnostic purposes as well as longer term for
therapeutic purposes. See the ACOEM Chronic Pain Guideline.
INJECTIONS FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
Sometimes Recommended
Injections are selectively recommended for combined diagnosis/treatment of brachial
plexopathies.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Either brachial plexopathy or a suspicion for brachial plexopathy needing diagnostic
confirmation. Among those with brachial plexopathy, injection would typically be reserved
for those with moderate to severe symptoms not trending towards resolution.
Benefits

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

626

Potential improvement in symptoms.
Harms
Symptom exacerbation and/or complication as brachial plexus blocks/injections are risks for
brachial plexopathy (Koff, 2008).
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Generally only one injection would be performed, typically combining an anesthetic and
glucocorticosteroid. A second injection would only be performed among those with a
significant, but incomplete, response to a prior injection. Repeat injections without
progressive improvements towards resolution would not be recommended.
Rationale
There is no quality evidence of efficacy and there is evidence suggesting inefficacy for other
shoulder disorders. Thus, injections are not recommended for treatment of brachial
plexopathies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, CINAHL, Cochrane Library,
and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: Injections; brachial
plexus; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized
controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly,
systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies. We found and reviewed
840 articles in PubMed, 52 in CINAHL, 95 in Cochrane Library, 2,300 in Google Scholar, and 0
from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 6 from PubMed, 0 from CINAHL, 0 from
Cochrane Library, 0 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 6 articles
considered for inclusion, 4 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Due to the large variety of injuries involving the brachial plexus, treatment should be
individualized, especially in the more severe cases. Immediate surgery has been
recommended for patients who sustain penetrating trauma (2236). Delayed surgical
exploration for non-penetrating trauma cases that fail to resolve sufficiently at 3 to 6
months has also been recommended (631,2236). Extensive physical or occupational therapy is

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

627

recommended for treating cases with limited debility. Some cases are severe and may
require surgical exploration and reconstructions (2234). Techniques have evolved over time
(2235,2242)
to include neurolysis (2027), nerve grafting, (2027) nerve transfer (neurotization) (22432247)
, and free muscle transfer (2248-2256). Evidence-based guidance on specific surgical
approaches and techniques is not possible at this time as there is a combination of wide
array of injuries with a lack of quality trials. Post-operative extensive rehabilitation generally
is required.
DIAGNOSTIC ARTHROSCOPY FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
Sometimes Recommended
Diagnostic arthroscopy is recommended for evaluation of carefully select patients with
shoulder pain and brachial plexopathies, including subsequent, definitive operative
approaches.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
One or more of the following in addition to brachial plexopathies: 1) rotator cuff tear with
surgical indications and the expectation that surgical treatment will immediately follow
arthroscopy (see below); 2) labral tear with surgical indications (see below); 3) impingement
syndrome with surgical indications (see below); 4) glenohumeral instability, 5) recurrent
dislocations, 6) labral tears, 7) other moderate or severe shoulder joint pain,
acromioclavicular arthritis, or mechanical symptoms with substantially reduced ROM or
functional impairment and failure to resolve with at least 1 trial of glucocorticosteroid
injection and/or physical or occupational therapy (or exercise program).
Benefits
Diagnostic confirmation and the opportunity for definitive treatment.
Harms
Infections, operative complications.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Arthroscopy would rarely be repeated other than for new indications.
Rationale
Arthroscopy is infrequently needed for brachial plexopathy patients, but may be helpful is
performed where there is thought to be a treatable abnormality, rather than merely for
diagnostic purposes (Dinnes et al., 2003, Fouse et al., 2007, Abrams, 2006, Baker et al.,
2003, Ahmad et al., 2004, Boszotta et al., 2004). If a specific diagnosis is not suggested by

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

628

and supported by the evaluation with history, physical examination, and imaging studies,
then surgical intervention is much less likely to be successful and caution should be taken in
doing a purely diagnostic arthroscopy. Arthroscopy is thought to be superior to MRI and
ultrasound for diagnosing partial thickness rotator cuff tears. Arthroscopy is invasive, has
adverse effects and is high cost. However, in select patients with brachial plexus injuries,
arthroscopy may be the best option and is thus recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: brachial plexus, brachial plexus injury;
controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled
trials, random allocation, random*, randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and
reviewed 1,050 articles in PubMed, 27,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†.
We considered for inclusion 30 from PubMed, 12 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Zero articles met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
SURGERY FOR TREATMENT OF BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
Sometimes Recommended
Surgery is selectively recommended for treatment of carefully select patients with brachial
plexus injuries.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Moderate to severe brachial plexus injuries, generally with supportive studies including at
least electrodiagnostic studies and imaging (e.g., MRI or CT myelography). Earlier surgery is
generally only indicated when there is clear indication(s) such as completely severed/torn
nerve structure. Otherwise, a period of supervised therapy with progressive strengthening is
generally indicated, typically requiring several weeks to 3 months depending on severity and
demonstrating progressive benefit.
Benefits
Improved function and pain.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

629

Harms
Infections, operative complications, worsened pain.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A second surgical procedures would be rarely indicated.
Rationale
Brachial plexus injuries are highly variable and diverse. Thus, clinical and surgical care must
be individualized. There are no quality studies for most surgical procedures used to treat
patients with brachial plexus injuries. However, one trial compared single with double
fascicular transfer to restore elbow flexion, and found no differences at one year (Martins et
al., 2013). One trial compared spinal accessory nerve transfer with intercostal nerve transfer
and spinal accessory nerve transfer was superior for better motor power, while intercostal
nerve transfer was better for earlier reinnervation of elbow flexion, sensory function, pain
and shoulder subluxation (Waikakul S, 1999). Another small pilot study found
photobiomodulation added to Oberlin neurotization resulted in superior outcomes (Foo et
al., 2020). Surgery is invasive, as adverse effects and is high cost. However, in select patients
with brachial plexus injuries, surgery may be the best option and is thus recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, CINAHL, Cochrane Library,
and Google Scholar without date limits using the following terms: General Surgery, Surgery,
Surgical Repair; brachial plexus; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials, randomized
controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*, randomized,
randomization, randomly, systematic, systematic review, retrospective, prospective studies.
We found and reviewed 3,676 articles in PubMed, 753 in CINAHL, 578 in Cochrane Library,
28,600 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 0 from
PubMed, 1 from CINAHL, 1 from Cochrane Library, 2 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other
sources. Of the 4 articles considered for inclusion, 3 randomized trials and 0 systematic
reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

REHABILITATION PROGRAMS
In the absence of quality evidence, it is recommended that brachial plexopathies be treated
as neuropathic pain and managed according to the recommendations in the ACOEM Chronic
Pain Guideline. Briefly, these recommendations include altering of sleep posture to

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

630

determine if there is a reduction in pain or other symptoms (Evidence I); aerobic exercise
(Evidence A); trial of aquatic therapy for patients who meet referral criteria for supervised
exercise therapy and have co-morbidities that preclude effective participation in a weightbearing physical activity (Evidence I); self-application of low-tech heat therapy (Evidence I);
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) as an adjunct for more efficacious
treatments (Evidence C); psychological evaluation as part of evaluation and management of
patients with chronic pain in order to assess whether psychological factors will need to be
considered and treated as part of treatment plan (Evidence I); cognitive-behavioral therapy
as an adjunct to an interdisciplinary program for the treatment of chronic pain (Evidence C);
multidisciplinary or interdisciplinary pain rehabilitation program with a focus on behavioral
or cognitive-behavioral approaches combined with conditioning exercise for patients with
chronic pain who demonstrate partial or total work incapacity due to pain (Evidence I); and
work conditioning, work hardening, and early intervention programs (Evidence I).

TRIGGER POINTS AND MYOFASCIAL PAIN
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The following section contains recommendations for evaluating and managing trigger points
and myofascial pain from the Evidence-Based Shoulder Disorders Panel. These
recommendations are based on critically appraised higher-quality research evidence or,
when such evidence was unavailable or inconsistent, on expert consensus as required in
ACOEM’s Methodology. Recommendations are made under the following categories:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Strongly Recommended, “A” Level
Moderately Recommended, “B” Level
Recommended, “C” Level
Insufficient – Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – No Recommendation (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Insufficient – Not Recommended (Consensus-based), “I” Level
Not Recommended, “C” Level
Moderately Not Recommended, “B” Level
Strongly Not Recommended, “A” Level

OVERVIEW
“Tender points” is a term used to characterize unusually tender areas of muscle, tendon, or
over boney prominences that reproduce the patient’s pain when palpated (2257-2263). Trigger
points include those points with tenderness, “knots” of muscle or overlying connective
tissue, reproduction of the patient’s pain when palpated, and elicitation of symptoms
distally during palpation (2258,2259,2264,2265). As the diagnostic entity heavily relies upon
subjective complaints without purely objective findings, the existence of this condition has
been questioned (2266,2267,2268). Work-relatedness of the condition is controversial with an
absence of quality data. There are lower quality studies of prevalence or incidence. Lifetime
prevalence has been estimated at up to 85% (2269). A survey of pain practitioners estimated a
point prevalence of 46. 1±27. 4% (2269). A cross-sectional study of 9,952 patients found 345
(3. 5%) with widespread pain, 4. 5% with widespread allodynia, and 2. 5% with fibromyalgia
(2270)
.
Patients with muscle tenderness are often given the diagnosis of “myofascial pain. ” This
term was initially developed to characterize patients presenting with muscle tenderness
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

631

accompanied by trigger points, “taut bands,” subtle shortening and weakness of involved
muscles, referred symptoms on compression or needling, and postural abnormalities, which
were hypothesized as reflective of microtrauma and the generation of excessive force per
muscle fiber leading to hypoxia, acidosis, and metabolic depletion. However, multiple
aspects of this construct have been disproven; thus, it is now controversial, particularly as it
has become increasingly clear that the development of prolonged and disabling muscular
pain is often linked to the presence of underlying psychosocial issues that foster inactivity
and dependence on palliative passive modalities and pharmacologic interventions
(466,2267,2270-2274)
. Hence, in the absence of a clear objective anatomic abnormality to
differentiate between patients with various forms of muscle pathology, they will be
characterized by the descriptive diagnosis of “trigger points. ”
Most RCTs reviewed herein and in the Fibromyalgia section of the ACOEM Chronic Pain
Guideline have not distinguished between tender and trigger points. However, these studies
frequently note pain limited to a body region, suggestive of trigger points/myofascial pain.
Many RCTs of fibromyalgia have cited adherence to the American College of Rheumatology
case definition, which requires widespread tender points (11 of 18 anatomically defined
points) (2275). Approximately 25% of fibromyalgia patients did not satisfy the American
College of Rheumatology (ACR) 1990 classification criteria at the time of the study (2275).
Quality literature shows that the presentation, risk factors, and management of patients
with fibromyalgia differs markedly from other patients with chronic pain. There are RCTs of
temporomandibular joint syndrome and facial pain that are classified as addressing
myofascial pain syndrome (2276-2280). However, as these conditions are not considered
occupational, they are not reviewed in detail. Treatment of fibromyalgia has primarily
involved active exercise and medications. Judicious use of injections and acupuncture has
also been widely used (see the Fibromyalgia section of the ACOEM Chronic Pain Guideline).
Work-relatedness of trigger points/myofascial pain is controversial as there are no quality
epidemiological studies demonstrating a relationship to work. There is epidemiological
evidence that certain cases of muscle tension syndrome may be occupational and that
disorder may be related to myofascial pain. However, the quality of the studies reported has
been suboptimal and true risk factors are not well defined (465). There is less controversy
about work-relatedness of trigger points/myofascial pain when the disorder arises in a body
part subject to a clear occupational injury. In practice, a fair number of these cases are
determined to be occupational (especially if there is an inciting event, no prior history, and
the pain and signs are limited to one body region and not bilateral or disseminated),
although supportive epidemiological evidence may be lacking. There is no quality
epidemiological evidence that tender points/fibromyalgia (or the closely related conditions
involving chronic widespread pain) are occupational conditions (see the ACOEM Chronic
Pain Guideline).
The physical examination of a patient with trigger points is typically normal other than for
muscle tenderness (and frequent evidence of depression, dysthymia, or other affective
disorders in fibromyalgia) (2267,2281). Myofascial pain-related tenderness should be isolated to
the body part affected by pain and not be widespread as with fibromyalgia. It also should
generally not cross the midline if there was an inciting event to one side of the body. Trigger
points and myofascial pain most commonly involve the periscapular muscles on one side of
the body. This condition may be indistinguishable from “muscle tension syndrome. ” Most
patients have an apparent “knot” or tender point in the muscle. That tenderness is
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

632

perceived as unusually tender to palpation compared with surrounding tissue, as well as
compared with other patients’ perceptions. Trigger points require the elicitation of distal
symptoms in addition to usually being painful on palpation. The amount of palpatory force
used to elicit pain complaints is unclear. The most widely used criteria have used 4kg of
force, which are the same criteria used for fibromyalgia (2275). A physical examination of a
patient with muscle tenderness also requires palpating other structures that are not
involved in the complaints to ascertain the distribution and character of potential tender
points and trigger points. Diffuse pain complaints, while needing to be clinically addressed,
may be reflective of a chronic pain syndrome and do not require a diagnostic label of
myofascial pain or fibromyalgia. There may be some limitation of ROM; however, in general,
while active ROM to an extreme may elicit or augment the patient’s pain, the final extent is
usually nearly or completely normal among these patients.
Diagnostic testing is generally not required for myofascial pain patients. Occasionally,
testing for rheumatological disorders is indicated. This may include erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, anti-rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, anti-Sm, anti-Ro, anti-La for rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, Sjogren
syndrome, and evaluation for mixed connective tissue disorder.

WORK LIMITATIONS
There is no evidence that activity limitations are beneficial for myofascial pain/trigger point
patients. It is recommended that patients be maintained at the maximal levels of activity.
Those with limitations are recommended to have their limitations gradually reduced. As a
regional pain syndrome, patient catastrophizing and fear avoidant beliefs may also be
present and require addressing. Those removed from work may need participatory
ergonomic evaluation and behavioral interventions to facilitate earlier return to work (see
ACOEM Chronic Pain guideline).

DIAGNOSTIC RECOMMENDATIONS
X-RAYS
X-RAYS FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Sometimes Recommended
X-rays are selectively recommended for evaluation of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder
pain that includes trigger points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Most patients with myofascial pain/trigger points do not require imaging. There are other
indications for x-rays including significant trauma, pain without trending towards
improvement, impaired use, and those with red flags.
Benefits

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

633

Diagnosis of a fracture, calcific tendinitis, osseous abnormality, or otherwise latent medical
condition(s).
Harms
Medicalization or worsening of otherwise benign condition; minor radiation exposure.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Obtaining x-rays once is generally sufficient with two to three views. Imaging of the thoracic
and/or cervical spine may sometimes be needed for evaluating myofascial pain/trigger
points, particularly for persistent symptoms, lack of response to treatment and other risk
factors. For patients with chronic shoulder pain, it may be reasonable to obtain a second set
of x-rays later to re-evaluate the patient’s condition, particularly if symptoms change.
Rationale
Myofascial pain/trigger points rarely require imaging. However, x-rays may help evaluate
patients with myofascial pain/trigger points, primarily to assist with the differential
diagnostic possibilities such as tendinoses and arthroses. X-rays are not invasive, low to
moderate costly, and have little risk of adverse effects and, therefore, are selectively
recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

DIAGNOSTIC ARTHROSCOPY
DIAGNOSTIC ARTHROSCOPIC SURGERY FOR TRIGGER POINTS AND MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

634

Arthroscopy is not recommended for the evaluation of trigger points/myofascial pain. There
are other indications for arthroscopy.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
Tendons and other tissues have not been shown to be involved in trigger point/myofascial
patients. Thus, arthroscopy is not recommended. There are other indications for
arthroscopy.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

BONE SCANS
BONE SCANS FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended
Bone scanning is not recommended for evaluation of trigger points/myofascial pain. There
are other indications for bone scanning.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
Bones are not believed to be involved in trigger points or myofascial pain syndrome. Thus,
imaging with bone scanning is not recommended. There are other indications for bone
scanning.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

635

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (CT) FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended
Computed tomography (CT) is not recommended for evaluation of trigger points/myofascial
pain. There are other indications for CT.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
Tendons, bones, and tissues have been shown to be normal in patients with trigger points
and myofascial pain syndrome. Thus, imaging with CT is not recommended. There are other
indications for CT.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

636

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
HELICAL COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (CT) FOR TRIGGER POINTS AND MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended
Helical computed tomography (CT) is not recommended for the evaluation of trigger points
or myofascial pain. There are other indications for helical CT.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
Tendons, bones, and tissues have been shown to be normal in patients with trigger points
and myofascial pain syndrome. Thus, imaging with helical CT is not recommended. There are
other indications for helical CT.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

LOCAL ANESTHETIC INJECTIONS
See Injection Therapies for Trigger Points.

ELECTROMYOGRAPHY (INCLUDING NERVE CONDUCTION STUDIES)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

637

ELECTROMYOGRAPHY AND NERVE CONDUCTION STUDIES FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR
MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended
Electrodiagnostic studies are not recommended to evaluate trigger points or myofascial pain
syndrome. There are other indications for electrodiagnostic studies.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
Trigger points and myofascial pain do not involve abnormalities on electromyography or
nerve conduction studies. Thus, electrodiagnostic studies are not recommended. There are
other indications for electromyography and nerve conduction studies.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is not recommended for the evaluation of trigger points
or myofascial pain. There are other indications for MRI.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

638

Tendons and tissues have been shown to be normal in patients with trigger points and
myofascial pain syndrome. Thus, imaging with MRI is not recommended. There are other
indications for MRI.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE ARTHROGRAM
MAGNETIC RESONANCE ARTHROGRAM FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended
Magnetic resonance arthrography (MRA) is not recommended for trigger points or
myofascial pain. There are other indications for MRA.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
Tendons and tissues have been shown to be normal in patients with trigger points and
myofascial pain syndrome. Thus, imaging with MRA is not recommended. There are other
indications for MRA.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

639

15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ULTRASOUND
ULTRASOUND FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended
Ultrasound is not recommended for use on patients with trigger points or myofascial pain.
There are other indications for ultrasound.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
Muscles and tissues have been shown to be normal in patients with trigger points and
myofascial pain. Thus, imaging with ultrasound is not recommended. There are other
indications for ultrasound.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

640

SINGLE-PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT)
SINGLE-PROTON EMISSION COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT) FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR
MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended
Single-proton emission computed tomography (SPECT) is not recommended for the
evaluation of patients with trigger points or myofascial pain syndrome.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain, including trigger
points or myofascial pain. One study found SPECT helpful in evaluating patients with
inflammatory arthropathies, particularly if there are concerns about the SI joints (Hanly,
1993). Some data suggest SPECT may outperform bone scanning. Additional studies are
needed to determine if SPECT or PET adds something to the diagnosis, treatment, and
outcomes beyond that obtained by a careful history, physical examination, plain x-rays, and
clinical impression before it can be recommended for evaluating shoulder disorders,
including trigger points and myofascial pain.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

641

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET)
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET) FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended
Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning is not recommended for the evaluation of
patients with trigger points or myofascial pain syndrome.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
There is no quality evidence with patient-related outcomes that either SPECT or PET is
helpful in improving care of acute, subacute, or chronic shoulder pain, including trigger
points or myofascial pain. One study found SPECT helpful in evaluating patients with
inflammatory arthropathies, particularly if there are concerns about the SI joints (Hanly,
1993). Some data suggest SPECT may outperform bone scanning. Additional studies are
needed to determine if SPECT or PET adds something to the diagnosis, treatment, and
outcomes beyond that obtained by a careful history, physical examination, plain x-rays, and
clinical impression before it can be recommended for evaluating shoulder disorders,
including trigger points and myofascial pain.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

642

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
ACTIVITY MODIFICATION AND EXERCISE
Patients with myofascial pain/trigger points should be maintained as physically active as
possible. Patients with limited activity levels require advancement of activity levels and
education as inactivity appears detrimental despite the potential for temporary relief of
symptoms that may accompany rest or inactivity.
Exercise has been used to treat trigger points/myofascial pain. Most studies are low quality
and appear to have emphasized stretching exercises (1681,2282). However, there are few
quality studies that assess which types of exercise and what regimens are most efficacious.
Aerobic exercise and strengthening exercises are also believed to be important, although
quality studies are limited to support those beliefs (2283,2284). Aquatic therapy involves the
performance of aerobic and/or flexibility and/or strengthening exercises in a pool to
minimize the effects of gravity, particularly where reduced weight-bearing status is
desirable.
Yoga for the treatment of myofascial pain/trigger points has not been standardized, but
tends to include postures that involve isometric muscle activity, stretches, breath control,
and relaxation. Traditional yoga also involves rules for personal conduct, sense withdrawal,
concentration, meditation, and “self-realization” (2285,2286), and different versions are
practiced. This review focuses on the exercise aspects of yoga and does not endorse nor
support spiritual elements or specific religious beliefs (2287).
AEROBIC EXERCISE FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Recommended
Aerobic exercise is recommended for treatment of trigger points/myofascial pain, although
quality evidence is lacking regarding its efficacy.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Trigger points/myofascial pain. Patients with potential for or with significant cardiac disease
should be evaluated prior to institution of vigorous exercises. Follow the American College
of Sports Medicine (ACSM) Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription for health
screening and risk stratification (Pescatello, 2014).

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

643

Benefits
Improved pain, resolution of the disorder, improved cardiovascular risks.
Harms
Negligible.
Indications for discontinuation
Development of other disorders.
Rationale
One trial found aerobic exercise effective for treatment of trigger points among patients
with breast cancer (Cantarero-Villanueva et al., 2012). Another trial found no statistical
additive benefit of exercise to acupuncture; however, sample sizes were small and the data
trended towards efficacy (Eftekharsadat et al., 2018). There are many other trials where
exercises are co-interventions in both groups. Although thought to be a different diagnosis,
myofascial pain/trigger points also appear to have similarities with fibromyalgia, for which
aerobic exercise is the most important therapeutic intervention (see the ACOEM Chronic
Pain Guideline). Aerobic exercise is not invasive, has some evidence of benefits and thus is
recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
STRETCHING EXERCISES FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Sometimes Recommended

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

644

Stretching exercises are selectively recommended for treatment of trigger points/myofascial
pain, accompanied by a loss of joint range of motion, and to attempt to increase overall
capacity and activity tolerance. Stretching is recommended to be combined with aerobic
exercise.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Myofascial pain/trigger points with reduced range of motion.
Benefits
Improved range of motion, potential to modestly reduce pain.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Stretching exercises may be taught with several appointments and then transitioned to a
home exercise program.
Indications for discontinuation
Restoration of normal ROM, failure to improve or non-compliance.
Rationale
There are no quality studies of stretching exercises for myofascial pain/trigger points.
Myofascial pain/trigger points appear to have similarities with fibromyalgia, for which
stretching exercises are believed to have some modest benefits; however, aerobic exercises
appear to be the most important therapeutic intervention, followed by strengthening
exercises (see the ACOEM Chronic Pain Guideline). Stretching exercises are not invasive,
may have some limited benefits among those with reduced ranges of motion, and thus are
selectively recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

645

PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 4 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
STRENGTHENING EXERCISES FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Recommended
Strengthening exercises are recommended for treatment of trigger points/myofascial pain
to attempt to increase overall capacity and activity tolerance. Strengthening exercises are
recommended to be combined with aerobic exercise. Stretching exercises would be
recommended among those with reduced ranges of motion.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications
Myofascial pain/trigger points.
Benefits
Reduced or eliminated pain; improve strength and capacity.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Strengthening exercises may be taught with several appointments and then transitioned to
a home exercise program.
Indications for discontinuation
Development of a strain during treatment course, failure to improve, non-compliance, fully
independent in a home exercise program.
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

646

There are no quality studies of strengthening exercises for myofascial pain/trigger points.
Myofascial pain/trigger points appear to have similarities with fibromyalgia, for which
aerobic exercises are most important, likely followed by strengthening exercises (see
ACOEM Chronic Pain Guideline). Strengthening exercises are not invasive, have some
benefits among those with reduced ranges of motion, and thus are recommended. They are
recommended to be combined with aerobic exercises. They are also recommended to be
combined with stretching exercises among those with significant reductions in ranges of
motion.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
INCLUSION OF FEAR AVOIDANCE BELIEF TRAINING FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL
PAIN
Recommended
Inclusion of fear avoidance belief training (FABT) during the course of treatment with either
a supervised or home exercise program is recommended.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Myofascial pain/trigger points.
Benefits
Improved compliance with exercises and activity advancements; reduced or eliminated
pain; improved capacity.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

647

Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
FABT is typically taught over several appointments along with institution of a structured
exercise program and advancements of activities.
Rationale
Fear avoidance belief training (FABT) is believed to be quite important in the management
of myofascial pain/trigger points. Inclusion of FABT principles in the course of exercise
training or supervision is thus highly desirable. Inclusion of FABT principles also strengthens
the patient’s education about these problems that should be a concordant message among
all members of the team treating the patient.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
AQUATIC THERAPY FOR MYOFASCIAL PAIN OR TRIGGER POINTS
Sometimes Recommended
Aquatic therapy is selectively recommended for treatment of trigger points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Moderate
Indications

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

648

Trigger points/myofascial pain patients who hare a contraindication for traditional aerobic
exercise and/or a strong belief and rationale that compliance would be significantly higher
with aquatic therapy than progressive walking/aerobic exercises which are typically much
easier to schedule/accomplish. Patients with potential for or with significant cardiac disease
should be evaluated prior to institution of vigorous exercises. Follow ACSM’s Guidelines for
Exercise Testing and Prescription (Pescatello, 2014) for health screening and risk
stratification.
Benefits
Improved pain, resolution of the disorder, improved cardiovascular risks.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A structured, progressive aquatic program (at least 4 times a week) at an intensity to reach
at least 60% of predicted maximum heart rate is recommended. Activity is recommended to
be gradually increased over days to weeks, beginning at 30 minutes/day and increasing to
45 minutes/day.
Indications for discontinuation
Development of other disorders.
Rationale
There are no quality studies of aquatic exercise for myofascial pain/trigger points.
Myofascial pain/trigger points appear to have similarities with fibromyalgia for which
aerobic exercises are the most important therapeutic intervention (see the ACOEM Chronic
Pain Guideline). Aquatic exercise is not invasive, is believed to have benefits due to its
aerobic benefits, and thus is efficacious. It is selectively recommended among those with a
strong belief and rationale that compliance would be significantly higher with aquatic
therapy than progressive walking or aerobic exercises, which are typically much easier to
schedule and accomplish.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

649

PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
YOGA FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of yoga for treatment of trigger
points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials of yoga for myofascial pain/trigger points. There is moderatequality evidence of effectiveness of yoga for the treatment of chronic LBP (Williams et al.,
2005, Sherman et al., 2005, Galantino et al., 2004). Yoga is not invasive, has low potential
for adverse effects, and is low cost. Aerobic and strengthening exercises are believed to be
important for treatment of myofascial pain/trigger points, thus there is no recommendation
for yoga in the absence of quality evidence of efficacy.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

650

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

HOT AND COLD THERAPIES
Cold or cryotherapies have sometimes been used for treatment of trigger points/myofascial
pain. There are many forms of heat therapy for treatment of musculoskeletal pain, including
hot packs, moist hot packs, sauna, warm baths, infrared, diathermy, and ultrasound. Many
of these have been utilized for treatment of patients with myofascial pain/trigger points.
Diathermy is a heat treatment that has been used clinically to heat tissue. There are two
forms of diathermy – short wave and microwave. (High-dose diathermy is also used to
coagulate tissue.) Proponents believe diathermy penetrates deeper than hot packs or
heating pads and stimulates healing. Infrared therapy is a heat treatment created by various
devices producing electromagnetic radiation in the infrared spectrum.
HOME USE OF CRYOTHERAPIES FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the home use of cryotherapies for trigger
points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials. Self-applications of cryotherapies using towels or reusable
devices are not invasive, generally without complications and do not have any appreciable
costs. As there is no evidence of efficacy, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

651

SELF-APPLICATION OF HEAT THERAPY FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against self-application of heat for treatment of trigger
points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications for discontinuation
Rationale
There are no quality trials. Self-applications of heat is not invasive, generally without
complications, and do not have any appreciable costs. As there is no evidence of efficacy,
there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
DIATHERMY FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended
Diathermy is not recommended for treatment of trigger points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

652

Diathermy has not been shown to be more effective than placebo diathermy for treatment
of multiple conditions (Sweetman et al., 1993, Koes et al., 1992, Koes et al., 1992, Koes et
al., 1993, Koes et al., 1992), although trigger points/myofascial pain have not been directly
studied. Diathermy is not invasive, has low adverse effects, is moderately costly, and lacks
evidence of efficacy. Thus, it is not recommended for treatment of trigger points/myofascial
pain.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
INFRARED THERAPY FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended
Clinician-based infrared therapy is not recommended for trigger points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials on infrared therapy for trigger points/myofascial pain. Infrared is
not invasive, has low potential for adverse effects, but is of moderate cost in aggregate and
thus is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

653

15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

DEVICES
Taping and kinesiotaping are used on the extremities, particularly in sports settings. Taping
(white athletic taping, cotton mesh adhesive tape often over gauze) is intended to stabilize
and support while restricting ROM; thus, it is used for treatment and preventive purposes
(961-964)
. Taping has been used to treat myofascial pain. It is often utilized immediately prior
to an activity and then removed, or the cotton mesh may be applied and removed after
hours of use. Kinesiotaping (thinner, elastic tape) is also intended for treatment, including
pain relief; however, it allows full ROM in contrast with traditional taping (957-971).
Kinesiotaping is proprietary; proponents believe the tape should be applied in specific
patterns and may or may not be stretched depending on the injury. Regardless, all types of
taping are utilized to attempt to treat musculoskeletal disorders. Difficulty with tolerating
the various types of tape may be problematic for some patients.
High intensity magnetic stimulation purportedly causes depolarization of nerves and has
been found to result in an antinociceptive effect in rats (972). Electromagnetic fields have
been known to increase osteoblastic activity. Therefore, proponents believe that magnetic
fields have therapeutic value in the treatment of MSDs.
MECHANICAL MASSAGE DEVICES FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended
The use of mechanical massage devices to administer massage is not recommended for
trigger points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality studies. Massage devices have no significant adverse effects, are
moderate to high cost, and thus are not recommended.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

654

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 12 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
TAPING AND KINESIOTAPING FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended
Taping and kinesiotaping are not recommended for the treatment of trigger
points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials of treatment for myofascial pain/trigger points. There is one highquality trial of kinesiotaping for treatment of shoulder pain, of short-term duration that
failed to show improvements in pain (Thelen et al., 2008); there are no other quality trials.
Kinesiotaping and taping have not been shown to have sustained efficacy. As use and
movement are thought to be helpful for treating trigger points/ myofascial pain, the
rationale for taping the shoulder and back for myofascial pain/trigger points is inapparent.
These interventions are not invasive. Taping and kinesiotaping have potential adverse
effects from intolerance of among those who do not tolerate it or the adhesives, but they
are generally minor. When the fees for both the tape and its application are considered,
taping is costly, especially since there are alternative interventions that have been shown to
be effective. As there is no quality evidence of durable effects, and these interventions are
counter to increasing activity, they are not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

655

randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MAGNETS AND MAGNETIC STIMULATION FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended
Magnets and magnetic stimulation are not recommended for the treatment of trigger points
or myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is no significant evidence base from which to draw conclusions on the utility of
magnets as a treatment of these patients. Magnets have been shown to be ineffective for
treatment of other MSDs including back pain and plantar fasciitis (see the ACOEM Low Back
Disorders and Ankle and Foot Disorders Guidelines). Other treatments have demonstrated
efficacy. Magnets are not invasive, have no adverse effects, and are low cost. However,
without evidence of efficacy, they are not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

656

we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ALLIED HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
Acupuncture has been used for treatment of chronic pain patients, including patients with
trigger points or myofascial pain (2282). Therapeutic ultrasound has been used for treatment
of myofascial pain/trigger points (1681). Low-level laser treatment usually involves laser
energy that does not induce significant heating. It is theorized that the mechanism of action
is through photoactivation of the oxidative chain (857).
Manipulation and mobilization are two types of manual therapy that have been used widely
to treat musculoskeletal disorders, although mostly for spine disorders (2288-2298) or in
patients with shoulder pain not of trigger points/myofascial pain origin (773,775,776). Massage
is a commonly used treatment for chronic muscular pain administered by clinicians as well
as others. It is sometimes referred to as soft tissue mobilization. A complicating factor in this
review is the varying methods of massage that are employed, including in more recent trials
described below.
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC TRIGGER POINTS/MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Recommended
Acupuncture is recommended for select use in chronic moderate to severe chronic trigger
points/myofascial pain as an adjunct to more efficacious treatments.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Moderate to severe chronic trigger points/myofascial pain not adequately confrolled after
NSAIDs, aerobic and strengthening exercises, and a trial of dry needling or injection(s) with
bupivacaine. Patients should also be prescribed, and be compliant with, progressive aerobic
and strengthening exercises while undergoing acupuncture.
Benefits
Modest improvement in pain.
Harms
Negligible other than deep needling, which can puncture or lacerate deep viscera in
inexperienced hands.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A limited course of 6 sessions as an adjunct to a conditioning program that has both graded
aerobic exercise and strengthening and stretching exercises (if range of motion decrements)
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

657

for treatment of trigger points/myofascial pain during which time there are clear objective
and functional goals that are to be achieved. Additional subsequent appointments may be
supportable if there are functional benefits that have not reached a demonstrable plateau.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution, intolerance, non-compliance with acupuncture, as well as non-compliance with
aerobic and strengthening and stretching exercises.
Rationale
There are few quality studies evaluating acupuncture for the treatment of tender and
trigger points; they tend to have significant design flaws which limit the strength of
conclusions. Efficacy of acupuncture for this indication is suggested by the highest quality
available study that has a non-acupuncture comparison group (Edwards et al., 2003), yet
that study has significant flaws. Considering acupuncture’s efficacy in treating chronic low
back pain (LBP), efficacy for this indication would not be surprising. For LBP, there is no
quality evidence suggesting that one type of acupuncture is superior to another (e.g.,
Chinese vs. Japanese). High-quality studies with sizable populations and long follow-up
periods are needed.
Acupuncture is minimally invasive, has low adverse effects, and is moderately costly.
Acupuncture is recommended to assist in increasing functional activity levels more rapidly
and the primary attention should remain on the conditioning program. In patients not
involved in a conditioning program, or who are non-compliant with graded increases in
activity levels, this intervention is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 7 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
DRY NEEDLING FOR MYOFASCIAL PAIN SYNDROME

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

658

Sometimes Recommended
Dry needling and acupuncture are recommended for select use for trigger points and
myofascial pain only as an adjunct to more efficacious treatments.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Moderate to severe chronic trigger points/myofascial pain not adequately controlled after
NSAIDs, aerobic and strengthening exercises. One trial suggests manual pressure should also
precede needling as it showed equivalency without being invasive (De Meulemeester et al.,
2017). Patients should also be prescribed, and be compliant with, progressive aerobic and
strengthening exercises while undergoing dry needling.
Benefits
Modest improvement in pain
Harms
Negligible other than deep needling, which can puncture or lacerate deep viscera in
inexperienced hands.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A limited course as an adjunct to a conditioning program that has both graded aerobic
exercise and strengthening and stretching exercises (if range-of-motion decrements) for
treatment of trigger points/myofascial pain during which time there are clear objective and
functional goals that are to be achieved. A second treatment should be based on
demonstrated functional gains.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution, intolerance, non-compliance, as well as non-compliance with aerobic and
strengthening and stretching exercises.
Rationale
One RCT compared deep dry needling to the most active and latent trigger points vs. most
active tender trigger points and found that needling of the active and latent trigger points
resulted in better pain palpation thresholds in the forearm (ECRB); however, this small trial
did not include meaningful clinical outcomes (Calvo-Lobo et al., 2017). Another trial
suggested manual pressure was clinically equivalent to dry needling (De Meulemeester et
al., 2017). Quality studies with sizable populations and long follow-up periods are needed.
Dry needling is minimally invasive, has low adverse effects, and is moderately costly. Dry

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

659

needling is selectively recommended to assist in increasing functional activity levels more
rapidly, and the primary attention should remain on the conditioning program. In patients
not involved in a conditioning program, or who are non-compliant with graded increases in
activity levels, this intervention is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 4 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ISCHEMIC COMPRESSION THERAPY FOR MYOFASCIAL PAIN SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for ischemic compression therapy for myofascial pain
syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are two RCTs and the results conflict. One crossover RCT suggested efficacy (Hains et
al., 2010), while another suggested a lack of efficacy although there were multiple cointerventions (Akbaba et al., 2019). Because results conflict, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

660

PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
ULTRASOUND FOR THE TREATMENT OF TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended
Ultrasound is not recommended for treatment of trigger points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
One quality trial found ultrasound ineffective for treatment of trigger points/myofascial pain
(Gam et al., 1998). The other trial compared two different active ultrasound techniques for
acute pain of less than 2 weeks duration, raising questions about applicability to the typical
trigger point/myofascial pain patient (Majlesi et al., 2004). Ultrasound is not invasive, has
few adverse effects, but is moderately costly and appears ineffective; thus, it is not
recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

661

LOW-LEVEL LASER THERAPY FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of low-level laser therapy for the
treatment of trigger points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are quality trials for treatment of trigger points/myofascial pain, however different
lasers and treatment regimens have been used and no long-term results have been
reported. Quality evidence is conflicting (Gur et al., 2004, Dundar et al., 2007, Altan et al.,
2005), with the highest quality studies finding no benefit (Dundar et al., 2007, Altan et al.,
2005). The quality study that showed benefit found minimal difference between the
treatment groups (Gur et al., 2004). Low-level laser therapy is not invasive, is unlikely to
have significant adverse effects, but in aggregate is moderate to high cost. Longer-term
evaluation, utilization of objective measures, and standardization of the treatment regimens
is required in addition to consistent, quality evidence of efficacy. Thus, there is no
recommendation for or against low-level laser therapy for treating patients with trigger
points or myofascial pain.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 3 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MANIPULATION AND MOBILIZATION FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against the use of manipulation and mobilization for
trigger points or myofascial pain.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

662

Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
One study of the ischemic compression of trigger points failed to find efficacy in comparison
with a standardized treatment program (Akbaba et al., 2019). Another trial comparing
combinations of manual compression of trigger points, manual stretching, intermittent cold,
and stretching compared with a wait-listed control reported some improvements (Bron et
al., 2011). Another trial of dry needling compared to manual pressure technique reported
comparable results, suggesting equivalent efficacy (De Meulemeester et al., 2017). Another
trial found manual compression therapy to be superior to compression therapy in other
locations (Hains et al., 2010). Another trial of diadynamic currents and manual therapy
found the combination superior to the individual treatments (Gomes et al., 2018). These
studies are small, heterogenous, and have strong risks of biases. Manipulation and
mobilization are not invasive, have some adverse effects, and are moderately costly
depending on numbers of treatments. In the absence of clear evidence of efficacy for
patients specifically with trigger points/myofascial pain, there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 6 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MASSAGE FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Recommended
Massage is recommended for select use in patients with trigger points/myofascial pain as an
adjunct to active treatments consisting primarily of a graded aerobic and strengthening
exercise program.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

663

Level of confidence Low
Indications
Moderate to severe chronic pain associated with trigger points/myofascial pain without
underlying serious pathology as an adjunct to a conditioning program that has both graded
aerobic exercises, strengthening, and stretching exercises. Massage is recommended to
assist in increasing functional activity levels more rapidly and the primary attention should
remain on the conditioning program. In those not involved in a conditioning program, or
who are non-compliant with graded increases in activity levels, this intervention is not
recommended.
Benefits
Modest improvement in pain.
Harms
Negligible.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
A limited course as an adjunct to a conditioning program that has both graded aerobic
exercise and strengthening and stretching exercises (if range of motion decrements) for
treatment of trigger points/myofascial pain during which time there are clear objective and
functional goals that are to be achieved. Three to 5 visits; if ongoing objective improvement,
up to 8 to 10 additional treatments appropriate. In unusual circumstances involving more
severe cases with ongoing transitions to an active treatment program and with evidence of
improvement, an additional 3 to 5 treatments may be indicated.
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution, intolerance, non-adherence with massage appointments, as well as nonadherence with aerobic and strengthening and stretching exercises.
Rationale
Massage is a commonly used treatment for musculoskeletal pain (Cen et al., 2003), but few
studies have evaluated disorders other than LBP (Preyde, 2000, Kalauokalani et al., 2001,
Melzack et al., 1983) and there are few quality studies for treatment of trigger points/
myofascial pain. One study of myofascial trigger points was negative (Gam et al., 1998).
Another of neck pain was negative (Irnich et al., 2001). Thus, the literature suggests
massage is a weakly effective treatment that is not as effective as active exercise or
acupuncture. Massage is not invasive, has low risk of adverse effects aside from short-term
pain (Cherkin et al., 2001), and is moderately costly. It is recommended for treatment of
chronic pain as an adjunct to a conditioning program.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

664

Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MYOFASCIAL RELEASE FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for myofascial release for trigger points/myofascial pain. It
may be used as an option in place of trigger point injections (not to exceed 4 to 6
treatments).
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Myofascial release has not been shown to be effective in quality studies. It is not invasive,
but the treatment is passive and moderately costly. There are active interventions shown to
be efficacious, and thus it is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

665

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

ELECTRICAL THERAPIES
There are multiple forms of electrical therapies used to treat musculoskeletal pain. These
include transcutaneous electrical stimulation (TENS), percutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (PENS), H-Wave® Device stimulation, sympathetic electrotherapy, microcurrent,
and interferential. The mechanism(s) of action, if any, are unclear.
High voltage galvanic, H-wave stimulation, interferential therapy, microcurrent, and
iontophoresis are electrical therapies. They are commonly believed to be efficacious
through distraction or through promoting healing. Iontophoresis additionally attempts to
transdermally deliver medications, typically glucocorticosteroids NSAIDs, lidocaine, etc.,
through the dermis to the target tissue. Percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation involves
inserting needles to a depth of 1 to 4 centimeters around a nerve serving a painful area. The
techniques described in available studies differ.
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) is used to attempt to control pain
through electrical stimulation delivered by pads placed on the surface of the skin for the
treatment of many painful conditions, including both non-inflammatory and inflammatory
disorders (2299-2303). Either a low-intensity prolonged (30 plus minutes) stimulation through
an active electrode over the painful area or a higher intensity over the painful area for a
brief (15 to 30 minutes) amount of time (commonly referred to as hyperstimulation
analgesia) are the two most common treatment protocols (2304). There are reports that both
low- and high-frequency TENS stimulate the endogenous opioid system, but the type of
response is dependent on frequency of stimulation. Through these mechanisms, it is
theorized that there may be a mechanism for increased physical activity in TENS users (2305).
Low intensity, high-frequency stimulation is generally 80 to 200Hz, whereas brief higher
intensity low frequency is generally 4 to 8Hz. Some studies do not report the frequency of
the stimulation.
HIGH-VOLTAGE GALVANIC THERAPY FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against high-voltage galvanic therapy for the treatment
of trigger points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

666

There are no quality trials for these electrical therapies. Electrical therapies are not invasive,
have low adverse effects, and are moderately costly in aggregate. As there is no quality
evidence, there is no recommendation for or against these treatments.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
H-WAVE® DEVICE STIMULATION FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against H-wave® Device Stimulation for the treatment of
trigger points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials for these electrical therapies. Electrical therapies are not invasive,
have low adverse effects and are moderately costly in aggregate. As there is no quality
evidence, there is no recommendation for or against these treatments.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

667

PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
INTERFERENTIAL THERAPY FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against interferential therapy for the treatment of
trigger points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials for these electrical therapies. Electrical therapies are not invasive,
have low adverse effects and are moderately costly in aggregate. As there is no quality
evidence, there is no recommendation for or against these treatments.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
MICROCURRENT FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
No Recommendation

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

668

There is no recommendation for or against microcurrent for the treatment of trigger
points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials for these electrical therapies. Electrical therapies are not invasive,
have low adverse effects and are moderately costly in aggregate. As there is no quality
evidence, there is no recommendation for or against these treatments.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
IONTOPHORESIS FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against iontophoresis for the treatment of trigger
points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There are no quality trials for these electrical therapies. Electrical therapies are not invasive,
have low adverse effects and are moderately costly in aggregate. As there is no quality
evidence, there is no recommendation for or against these treatments.
Evidence

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

669

A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
PERCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION (PENS) FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR
MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended
Percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (PENS) is not recommended for treating trigger
points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
PENS has been evaluated in small scale, short-term studies of low back pain but no quality
studies have been reported for treatment of trigger points/myofascial pain. PENS is
minimally invasive and no significant adverse effects have been reported (although most
articles failed to address complications). However, it is high cost in aggregate and with
absence of evidence of efficacy, it is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 2 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

670

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
TRANSCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION (TENS) FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR
MYOFASCIAL PAIN
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for or against use of transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (TENS) for treatment of trigger points/myofascial pain.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
There is one trial of acupuncture-like TENS compared with conventional TENS and reported
that both treatments were superior to a sham TENS, however the baseline DASH scores are
markedly different (Ebadi et al., 2021). There are no quality studies for trigger
points/myofascial pain (Hsueh et al., 1997, Chee et al., 1986). Most of the quality evidence
addresses treatment of spine pain (Oosterhof et al., 2008, Oosterhof et al., 2006, Koke et al.,
2004, Vitiello et al., 2007, Bloodworth et al., 2004, Deyo et al., 1990, Jarzem et al., 2005).
TENS is not invasive, has no significant adverse effects, and is moderately costly, but there is
no quality evidence of efficacy for trigger points/myofascial pain. Other treatments have
documented efficacy; thus, there is no recommendation for or against the use of TENS.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

671

100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
NEUROMODULATION (TDCS) FOR MYOFASCIAL PAIN SYNDROME
No Recommendation
There is no recommendation for neuromodulation (tDCS) for myofascial pain syndrome.
Strength of evidence No Recommendation, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
One short-term RCT with tiny sample sizes found no significant between group differences
that included an attempted sham (Choi et al., 2014) and thus there is no recommendation.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 1 randomized trial and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

INJECTION THERAPIES
Injections into the muscle “knots” or clinically tender spots have typically consisted of an
anesthetic with or without glucocorticoid (Han et al., 1997, NHS Centre for Reviews and
Dissemination, 2000). Botulinum injections have antinociceptive properties and have been
used to produce muscle paresis (Gobel et al., 2006, Qerama et al., 2006, Richards et al., 2007,
Ferrante et al., 2005). Adherents believe that this pharmacologically induced resting of the
muscle is useful as a treatment for a number of MSDs. However, these injections have
primarily been used for numerous non-occupational conditions such as cervical dystonia (Lew
et al., 1997, Brashear et al., 1998, Benecke et al., 2005, Brans et al., 1996, Lew et al., 2000,
Brin et al., 1999, Tassorelli et al., 2006, Poewe et al., 1998, Pappert et al., 2008, Ostergaard et
al., 1994, Odergren et al., 1998, Laubis-Herrmann et al., 2002, Ranoux et al., 2008, Naumann
et al., 2002, Lu et al., 1995, Comella et al., 2005, Truong et al., 2005), torticollis (Tsui et al.,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

672

1986, Blackie et al., 1990, Lorentz et al., 1991, Moore et al., 1991, Koller et al., 1990, Greene
et al., 1990, Gelb et al., 1989), strabismus, migraine prophylaxis (Evers et al., 2004),
blepharospasm (Charles, 2004), neuropathic pain after neck dissection (Wittekindt et al.,
2006), and severe primary axillary hyperhidrosis (see ACOEM Chronic Pain Guideline)
(Charles, 2004, Naumann et al., 2001). They have also been used to treat upper back and
myofascial pain (Gobel et al., 2006, Porta et al., 2004, De Andres et al., 2003). Botulinum
injections have been used to treat trigger points and myofascial pain. These injections are
thought to directly treat a taut muscle band and to have analgesic properties (Qerama et al.,
2006, Richards et al., 2007, Ferrante et al., 2005).
TRIGGER POINT INJECTIONS AND DRY NEEDLING USING LOCAL ANESTHETIC
Recommended
Trigger point injections consisting solely of a topical anesthetic such as bupivacaine are
recommended as a secondary or tertiary option for subacute or chronic trigger points that
are not resolving. Dry needling is an acceptable alternative. Adjunctive use of a
glucocorticosteroid is not recommended.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Indications
Persistent moderate to severe trigger points not resolving with more conservative means
(e.g., NSAIDs, progressive aerobic exercises, and other exercises). Trigger points proposed
for injection should also be shown to be persistent in one anatomic location prior to
performing an injection. Patients should also be prescribed, and be compliant with,
progressive aerobic and strengthening exercises.
Benefits
Modest improvements in pain.
Harms
Medicalization, hematomas, low risk of infection.
Frequency/Dose/Duration
Up to 4 injections a session with a follow-up appointment to assess subjective and objective
measures of efficacy. Injections should not be repeated more than every 3 to 4 weeks (Ojala
et al., 2006). If results are not satisfactory after the first injection, a second may be
attempted. If there are not subjective and objective improvements at that point, further
injections are not recommended (Ojala et al., 2006). In general, up to 3 sets of injections are
recommended to allow sufficient time to (re)establish a program of active therapy or
identify modalities for successful self-application. Repeated injections should be linked to
subjective and objective functional improvements. The use of therapeutic injections without

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

673

participation in an active exercise (both progressive aerobic and strengthening) or
rehabilitation program is not recommended (Kamanli et al., 2005, Wheeler et al., 2001).
Indications for discontinuation
Resolution, intolerance, completion of 2 set(s) of injections without materially affecting the
condition.
Rationale
The literature on this subject is heterogeneous. Study designs, health outcomes assessed,
interventions performed all differ widely across these studies (Byrn, 1993, Sonne et al.,
1985). The highest quality study that addressed a typical patient with periscapular or
cervical tender points or trigger points found no difference between bupivacaine and
botulinum other than much lower cost for bupivacaine (Graboski et al., 2005). The next
highest quality study of typical patients suggests anesthetic injections were superior to
saline (Hameroff et al., 1981). There are no long-term studies or follow-up to suggest
enduring benefits of these injections. There is no evidence that a steroid is required for
efficacy of these injections, particularly those that are tender point injections (Porta, 2000).
Considering glucocorticosteroids also have adverse effects, use of glucocorticosteroids in
these injections is not recommended.
A study evaluated injection with 1% lidocaine versus lidocaine/water mixture and suggested
that the lidocaine/water mixture had less injection site pain and better pain outcomes at 14
days after injection (Iwama et al., 2000). However, another report by the same author found
no differences among 4 injection mixtures (Iwama et al., 2001). A trial comparing
transcranial direct current stimulation and trigger point injection with sham stimulation
found few differences over 5 days (Choi et al., 2014). A pilot trial of deep dry needling
reported some improvements after one treatment (Calvo-Lobo et al., 2017). Another trial of
dry needling compared to manual pressure technique reported comparable results,
suggesting equivalent (in)efficacy (De Meulemeester et al., 2017). These injections are
invasive, have rare adverse effects, (Garvey et al., 1989) and are moderately costly
depending on number. An injectable anesthetic, typically either lidocaine or bupivacaine are
recommended (Kamanli et al., 2005, Iwama et al., 2000). There are no studies evaluating
them on a longer term basis, though there are studies suggesting benefits lasting up to 14
days (Collee et al., 1991). Acupuncture is an alternative to these injections.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 9 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

674

† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
TRIGGER POINT INJECTIONS USING GLUCOCORTICOSTEROIDS
Not Recommended
Glucocorticosteroids are not recommended for use in trigger point injections.
Strength of evidence Not Recommended, Evidence (C)
Level of confidence Low
Rationale
Quality studies suggest there is no benefit from including a glucocorticosteroid with these
injections (Porta, 2000). Considering glucocorticosteroids also have adverse effects, use of
glucocorticosteroids in these injections is not recommended.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.
BOTULINUM INJECTIONS FOR TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Not Recommended
Botulinum injections are moderately not recommended for treating trigger
points/myofascial pain.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

675

Strength of evidence Moderately Not Recommended, Evidence (B)
Level of confidence Moderate
Rationale
Botulinum toxin A to treat trigger points/myofascial pain has been evaluated in multiple
placebo-controlled quality studies with nearly all studies finding a lack of benefit. Within this
body of evidence, there are five high-quality studies with the four largest studies all finding
a lack of clear benefit (Ojala et al., 2006, Gobel et al., 2006, Ferrante et al., 2005, Lew et al.,
2008). One study suggested some modest results compared with saline injection (Gobel et
al., 2006), but this study utilized a more severely affected patient population, suggested low
magnitude of benefit, and the benefit was eliminated by the end of the trial. Moderatequality studies also failed to find benefits from botulinum injection (Ojala et al., 2006,
Qerama et al., 2006). There is one study favoring botulinum (Porta, 2000), but the control
group utilized a depot preparation of methylprednisolone. Botulinum does not appear
superior to bupivacaine (Graboski et al., 2005), and the latter has a much lower adverse
effect profile.
Botulinum injections are invasive, have adverse effects that include fatalities (Li et al., 2005),
and are costly. There are no quality studies available with long-term follow-up (Argoff, 2003,
Difazio et al., 2002). These injections induce weakness, yet many of the most successful
interventions build strength and/or endurance. With quality evidence suggesting a lack of
meaningful benefits, botulinum injections are moderately not recommended for treatment
of trigger points/myofascial pain.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Of the 23 articles considered for
inclusion, 11 randomized trials and 0 systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
There are no surgical indications for trigger points/myofascial pain. There are indications for
surgery for other disorders.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

676

BEHAVIORAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS
Psychological and behavioral factors are key components of chronic nonmalignant pain
conditions. Evaluation of patients with chronic trigger points/myofascial pain or pain that is
not resolving as expected for psychological factors is frequently utilized (see ACOEM Chronic
Pain Guideline for indications for cognitive behavioral therapy).
PSYCHOLOGICAL EVALUATION FOR CHRONIC TRIGGER POINTS OR MYOFASCIAL PAIN
Recommended
A psychological evaluation is recommended as part of the evaluation and management of
patients with chronic trigger points/myofascial pain to assess whether psychological factors
will need to be considered and treated as part of the overall treatment plan.
Strength of evidence Recommended, Insufficient Evidence (I)
Level of confidence High
Indications
Chronic, moderate to severe trigger points/myofascial pain, especially if there is ongoing
disability or need of treatment. Select patients with subacute moderate to severe trigger
points/myofascial pain are also candidates, particularly if not trending towards resolution
and/or with debility.
Benefits
Identification of contributing factors.
Harms
Negligible.
Rationale
There are no quality trials. Psychological assessments are routinely accomplished to
evaluate for the existence and impacts of psychological factors. Evaluations are generally
low to moderate cost and can help identify contributing factors, and thereby suggest
treatment options. Thus, psychological evaluation is recommended particularly for chronic,
moderate to severe trigger points/myofascial pain, especially if there is ongoing disability or
need of treatment. Select patients with subacute moderate to severe trigger
points/myofascial pain are also candidates, particularly if not trending towards resolution
and/or with debility.
Evidence
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed and Google Scholar
between 2013 to 2022 using the following terms: myofascial pain syndromes shoulder,
trigger points shoulder, myofascial pain shoulder; controlled clinical trial, controlled trials,
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

677

randomized controlled trial, randomized controlled trials, random allocation, random*,
randomized, randomization, randomly. We found and reviewed 31 articles in PubMed,
15,400 in Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources†. We considered for inclusion 17 from
PubMed, 6 from Google Scholar, and 0 from other sources. Zero articles met the inclusion
criteria.
† The results for databases are sorted by relevancy based on customized search term
algorithms. Algorithms for each database determine relevancy. The first 100 articles are
reviewed in each search, and if relevant literature appears in the first 100 articles, we
review an additional 100 articles. If relevant articles appear in these additional 100 articles,
we then review another 100. We continue this pattern of review until we review a batch of
100 articles that contains no relevant literature. When this happens then the remaining
articles are not reviewed due to a lack of relevancy.

FOLLOW-UP VISITS
Patients with trigger points/myofascial pain generally require at least a few to many followup appointments depending on severity, persistence, response to therapy, fear avoidant
beliefs, and compliance with treatments including exercises. Follow-up appointments are
required every 1 to 4 weeks until resolution or an end-of-improvement plateau is reached.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

678

CONTRIBUTORS AND DISCLOSURES
Editor-in-Chief:
Kurt T. Hegmann, MD, MPH, FACOEM, FACP
Evidence-based Practice Shoulder Panel Chair:
Laura Rachel Kaufman, MD, PhD, FACOEM
Evidence-based Practice Shoulder Panel Members:
Manijeh Berenji, MD, MPH, FACOEM
Margaret Cook-Shimanek, MD, MPH, FACOEM
R. Michael Greiwe, MD
Nitin Jain, MD, MSPH
J. Mark Melhorn, MD, FAAOS, FACOEM, FAADEP, FACS, FASSH, FAAHS, FIAIME
Lori A. Michener, PhD, PT, ATC, SCS, FAPTA
James Ethan Moses, MD, MPH, FACOEM
Gary W. Pushkin, MD, FAAOS
Shawn C. Roll, PhD, OTR/L, RMSKS, FAOTA, FAIUM
Richard E. Strain, Jr., MD
Michael S. Weiss, MD, MPH, MRO, FAAEM, AAPMR, FACOEM
These panel members represent expertise in occupational medicine, preventive medicine and
public health, family medicine, orthopedic surgery, hand surgery, physical medicine and
rehabilitation, physical therapy, occupational therapy, and health and rehabilitation
sciences. As required for quality guidelines (Institute of Medicine’s (IOM) Standards for
Developing Trustworthy Clinical Practice Guidelines and Appraisal of Guidelines for Research
and Evaluation (AGREE)), a detailed application process captured conflicts of interest. The
above panel has none to declare relevant to this guideline.
Methodology Committee Consultant:
Nelson S. Haas, MD, MPH, MA, FACOEM
Research Conducted By:
Kurt T. Hegmann, MD, MPH, FACOEM, FACP
Matthew S. Thiese, PhD, MSPH
Kristine Hegmann, MSPH

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

679

Emilee Eden, MPH
Jenna Praggastis, BS
Madison Tallman
Derrick Wong, BS
Madeleine Smith, BA
Christina Pick, BS
Braydon Black, BS
Michael Langston, BS
Jenny Echeverria, BS
Chapman Cox, MSOH
Abril Lopez
Uchenna Ogbonnaya, PhDC
Katherine Castro, PhDC
Alison Mancuso, BA
Chloe Dyches
Travis Jacobs, BS
Spencer Claflin, MSOH
McKaylee Smith, BS
Andrew Barbee
Elise Chan
Mary Schaelling
Chris Johnsen, BS
Giovani Robles
Specialty Society and Society Representative Listing:
ACOEM acknowledges the following organizations and their representatives who served as
reviewers of the Shoulder Disorders Guideline. Their contributions are greatly appreciated.
By listing the following individuals or organizations, it does not infer that these individuals or
organizations support or endorse the Shoulder Disorders Guideline developed by ACOEM.
American College of Physicians
Angelique Collamer, MD, FACP, FACR
California Orthopedic Association

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

680

Lesley J. Anderson, MD
Edward Diao, MD
Mark Ganjianpour, MD
John Itamura, MD
Michael Klassen, MD, FAAOS
William Pannell, MD
Charles F. Preston, MD
Michael Purnell, MD, FAAOS
Mark Schultzel, MD MBA, FAAOS, FAOA
Daniel Solomon, MD
Patrick St. Pierre, MD
Other Reviewers:
Steven Mandel, MD, FACOEM

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Manijeh Berenji, MD, MPH, FACOEM (Panel Member)
Chief, Occupational Health, VA Long Beach Healthcare System; Site Director, UC Irvine
Occupational and Environmental Medicine Residency Program; Health Sciences Assistant
Clinical Professor, UC Irvine Public Health; Health Sciences Clinical Assistant Professor,
University of California Irvine School of Medicine
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—Lead, Academic and Community
Partnerships, UC Center for Climate, Health and Equity; Medical Champion for Medical
Society Consortium on Climate and Health; Member of Board of Directors for Association of
Occupational and Environmental Clinics; Member of CDC Reproductive and Children's
Environmental Health Work Group; Vice Chair of ACOEM Health Informatics Section; Vice
Chair of ACOEM Council on Scientific Affairs; Chair of ACOEM Member Communications
Section; Vice Chair of ACOEM Environmental Health Section; Member of ACOEM’s
CMSS/CDC Physician Advisory Workgroup; Reviewer for Family Medicine and Community
Health, Journal of Occupational Medicine and Toxicology, Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation
leaflets, Trends in Telemedicine and E-health
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities—Academic Consultant, Reed Group; CoAuthor, Cochrane Work on Prognostic Factors for Return to Work following Knee
Arthroplasty; Member of ACPM Science and Translation Committee, Evidence Review
Subcommittee; Member of ACPM Science and Translation Committee, Practice and Policy
Guidance Subcommittee
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

681

Margaret Cook-Shimanek, MD, MPH, FACOEM (Panel Member)
Medical Director, Montana Department of Labor and Industry; Associate Medical Director
for Colorado Division of Workers' Compensation
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—External Advisory Panel for Mountain
and Plains Education Research Center with the University of Colorado; ACOEM Climate
Change Task Force
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities— Editor for Colorado Medical Treatment
Guidelines; Review Committee for Montana Department of Labor Utilization and Treatment
Guidelines
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None
R. Michael Greiwe, MD (Panel Member)
Director, Cincinnati Shoulder and Elbow Fellowship and Chief Shoulder and Elbow Surgery,
OrthoCincy; CEO, OrthoLive; Attending in Orthopaedic Surgery for St. Elizabeth Medical
Center; Affiliate Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Cincinnati Medical Center;
Staff Physician for Cincinnati Children's Medical Center; Staff Physician for Christ Hospital
Medical Center; Director of Orhopaedic Quality and Research, St. Elizabeth Medical Center
Orthopaedic Institute; Affiliate Professor, Dept of Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine,
University of Cincinnati Medical Center; Affiliate Professor, Family Medicine Residency
Program, St. Elizabeth Medical Center; Affiliate Professor, Fellowship in Sports Medicine, St.
Elizabeth Medical Center
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—Peer Reviewer for Journal of American
Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, JBJS Reviews - Sports
Medicine, The Physician and Sports Medicine, Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities—None
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—Consultant, Stryker Orthopedics; Shareholder
in OrthoLive
Nelson S. Haas, MD, MPH, MA, FACOEM (Methodology Committee Consultant)
Medical Director, MaineGeneral Workplace Health
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—None
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities— Chair, ACOEM’s Evidence-based Practice
Ankle and Foot Panel; Member, ACOEM Guidelines Methodology Committee; Methodology
Consultant, ACOEM’s Evidence-based Practice Workplace Mental Health Panel
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

682

Kurt T. Hegmann, MD, MPH, FACOEM, FACP (Editor-in-Chief)
Professor and Center Director, Rocky Mountain Center for Occupational and Environmental
Health, University of Utah
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—Board of Trustees (2003-12) and Chair
(2010-12), American Board of Preventive Medicine; Chair, Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration’s Medical Review Board (2006-2010); Member, Journal of Occupational and
Environmental Medicine Editorial Board
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities—Chair, Evidence-based Practice
Committee, ACOEM (2006-present)
Research Grants/Other Support—NIOSH (CDC) Training grants and research grants primarily
on the epidemiology of musculoskeletal disorders (e.g., CTS, shoulder tendinosis, LBP) and
truck driver safety.
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—Consultant, Reed Group (ACOEM Guidelines
Editor-in-Chief); Consulting with companies, unions and insurers
Nitin Jain, MD, MSPH (Panel Member)
Associate Professor of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Orthopaedics, and
Epidemiology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center; Vice Chair/Director of Research of PMR
at Vanderbilt University Medical Center; Co-Director of Sports Medicine Research of
Orthopaedics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center; Director of Shoulder Research of
Orthopaedics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—Education Committee member,
Association of Academic Physiatrists; Package of Rehabilitation Interventions, Rehabilitation
2030 for WHO; Capacity Building of Rehabilitation Workforce in Low- and Middle-Income
Countries, ISPRM; Physiatry Workforce Taskforce member, Association of Academic
Physiatrists; Evidence, Quality & Performance Committee member, AAPMR; Associate
Editor, American Journal of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation; Associate Editor, Journal
of Bone and Joint Surgery
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities—Cochrane Physical and Rehabilitation
Medicine Methodology Committee member, Cochrane Collaboration; Clinical Practice
Guideline Workgroup for Glenohumeral Joint Osteoarthritis member, AAOS; Clinical Practice
Guidelines for Shoulder Instability member, APTA
Research Grants/Other Support—Principal Investigator for PCORI grant on operative versus
non operative treatment for atraumatic rotator cuff tears: a multicenter randomized
controlled pragmatic trial; Site Principal Investigator for NIH grant on peripheral nerve
stimulation for subacromial impingement syndrome; Collaborator/Mentoring Committee
for NIH grant on genetic and non-genetic risk factors for rotator cuff disease; Principal
Investigator for Vanderbilt Institute for Clinical and Translational Research for peripheral
nerve stimulation for subacromial impingement syndrome
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

683

Laura Rachel Kaufman, MD, PhD, FACOEM (Panel Chair)
Centers for Occupational Health & Education Medical Director, Kaiser Permanente of
Washington (KPWA)
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—None
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities— Shoulder surgery section member,
Washington State Labor & Industries Guidelines Committee
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None
J. Mark Melhorn, MD, FAAOS, FACOEM, FAADEP, FACS, FASSH, FAAHS, FIAIME (Panel
Member)
The Hand Center, P. A. ; Clinical Associate Professor, Section of Orthopaedics, Department
of Surgery, University of Kansas School of Medicine - Wichita
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations – Past Board Chair, Current Past President
and Current Chairman of Nomination Committee, and Member of Ethics & Discipline
Committee, American Academy of Disability Evaluating Physicians; Member of Occupational
Health Committee, Program Director for Expert Witness Program, and Program Director for
Occupational Orthopaedics and Workers' Compensation: A Multidisciplinary Perspective,
American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities – Chair, ACOEM Evidence-based Practice
Hand, Wrist and Forearm Panel; Member, ACOEM Evidence-based Practice Shoulder Panel;
Lead Author, Section of Musculoskeletal Upper Extremity, AMA's Guides to the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment, 6th Edition; Member, Advisory Board, The Medical Disability
Advisor; Developer and Medical Consultant, CtdMAP (MAP Managers and PHI (Physical
Health Index), co-editor of the text "AMA Guides™ to the Evaluation of Work Ability and
Return to Work" 2nd edition AMA Press (2011) and the "AMA Guides™ to the Evaluation of
Disease and Injury Causation" 2nd edition AMA Press (2014)
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None
Lori A. Michener, PhD, PT, ATC, SCS, FAPTA (Panel Member)
Professor, Director of Clinical Outcomes and Research; Director, COOR Lab Division of
Biokinesiology and Physical Therapy at the Herman Ostrow School of Dentistry, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—Member, Orthopaedic Section, APTA;
External Board of Scientific Counselors, Still Research Institute; Scientific Advisory Board,
Expert Clinical Benchmarks; Editorial Board, Orthopedics Today; Associate Editor, Journal of
Orthopaedic and Sports Physical Therapy; Editorial Board Member, British Elbow and
Shoulder Society Journal: Shoulder and Elbow

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

684

Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities— Member, Rotator Cuff Guideline Work
Group, AAOS; Member, Clinical Practice Guidelines on Rehabilitation of Shoulder Disorders,
APTA
Research Grants/Other Support—Foundation for Physical Therapy Research: Biomarkers of
Tendon Recovery in Patients with Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy; Consultant & Clinical
Outcomes Lead, NIH-NIAMS Grant: a simple and quantitative clinical assessment of
neuromuscular recovery after ACL reconstruction; Principal Investigator, Charles D. and
Mary A. Bauer Foundation Grant: mechanisms of central sensitization: a study of pain-free
and patients with shoulder pain; Lead Principal Investigator, PAC-12 Student Athlete Health
and Well Being Grant: biomechanical metrics to improve performance and reduce elbow
injuries in baseball; Lead Principal Investigator, Charles D. and Mary A. Bauer Foundation
Grant: optimization of spinal manual therapy for shoulder pain
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None
James Ethan Moses, MD, MPH, FACOEM (Panel Member)
Medical Director, Colorado Division of Workers' Compensation; Chief Medical Officer, Peak
Form Medical Clinic; Assistant Clinical Professor, Department Family Medicine, University of
Colorado School of Medicine; Adjunct Assistant Professor, Department Environmental
Occupational Health, Colorado School of Public Health
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations— OEM Editor, Colorado Opioid Solution
Clinicians United to Resolve the Epidemic; Editor, Colorado Workers’ Compensation Provider
Education Curricula; Past President of Rocky Mountain Academy of Occupational
Environmental Medicine
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities—Senior Editor, Colorado Division of
Workers' Compensation Medical Treatment Guidelines; Associate Editor, Colorado 2016
Lower Extremity Medical Treatment Guideline
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None
Gary W. Pushkin, MD, FAAOS (Panel Member)
Cohen and Pushkin MD PA; Gary Pushkin, LLC
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—AAOS Board of Councilors; Member of
AAOS State Legislative and Regulatory Issues Committee; IAIME Member of Government
Relations Committee; Member of Joint Committee on Workers' Compensation Benefit and
Insurance Oversight; Board/Committee member, MedChi - The Maryland State Medical
Society; Board/Committee member, Maryland Orthopaedic Association; Reviewer for
Journal American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities—None
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

685

Shawn C. Roll, PhD, OTR/L, RMSKS, FAOTA, FAIUM (Panel Member)
Associate Professor, University of Southern California, Chan Division of Occupational Science
and Occupational Therapy
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—Reviewer, Patient-Centered Outcomes
Research Institute (PCORI); Panelist, AIUM Work-related Musculoskeletal Disorder Practice
Principles Workgroup; Founding Member and Director, Musculoskeletal Occupational
Therapy Research Network (MOTR-Net); Editorial Board and Associate Editor, Original
Research & Musculoskeletal Applications, Journal of Diagnostic Medical Sonography; Adhoc
Peer Reviewer for American Journal of Occupational Therapy, Archives of Physical Medicine
and Rehabilitation, European Radiology, Journal of Diagnostic Medical Sonography, Journal
of Ultrasound in Medicine, Occupational Therapy Journal of Research, Ultrasound in
Medicine and Biology
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities—ACOEM Evidence-based Hand, Wrist,
Forearm Panel; AOTA's Upper Extremity Musculoskeletal Disorders and Occupational
Therapy Interventions
Research Grants/Other Support—National Institutes of Health (NIH) / National Institute of
Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases (NIAMS): F31AR074894; Centers for Disease
Control (CDC) / National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH):
R01OH010665, IPA2216235; National Science Foundation (NSF): CMMI-1763134, ECCS2222572, IIS-2204942; American Hand Therapy Foundation; Society for Diagnostic Medical
Sonography
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None
Richard E. Strain, Jr., MD (Panel Member)
Orthopaedic Associates of South Broward; South Florida Musculoskeletal Care
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations— Rand Health, The Carpal Tunnel Quality
Measure Group (2007); Rand Health, Panel Member, RAND-AMA-PCPI Office of National
Coordinator for Health IT; Advancing Clinical Decision Support Project, Establishing CDS
Meaningful Use Goals for Specialties Orthopedics Expert Panel (2011); American Academy
of Orthopedic Surgery Committee on Professionalism (2005-2015); American Academy of
Orthopedic Surgery Council on Research, Quality Assessment and Technology (2005-2008);
American Academy of Orthopedic Surgery Council on Education (2002-2005); Chairman,
American Academy of Orthopedic Surgery Committee on Occupational Health (2002-2008)
Other Guidelines Related Professional Activities— Co-Chairman for AAOS Low Back Pain
Workgroup (2007); AAOS Guidelines Oversight Committee (2007-2008)
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest— Astellas: Research support, Bristol Myers:
Research support, Easi: Consultant/Speaker; Ethicon: Consultant/Speaker; Meda: Research
support; Pfizer: Research support; Sanofi-Aventis: Research support; Takeda: Research
support

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

686

Michael S. Weiss, MD, MPH, MRO, FAAEM, AAPMR, FACOEM (Panel Member)
Consultant, Paradigm Health, Inc.
National, Regional, Local Committee Affiliations—Corporate Health Achievement Award
Examiner, ACOEM
Guidelines Related Professional Activities—Chair, ACOEM Evidence-based Practice Opioids
Panel; Chair, ACOEM Guidelines Methodology Committee
Research Grants/Other Support—None
Financial/Non-Financial Conflict of Interest—None

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

687

REFERENCES
1. De Carli, Angelo, Pulcinelli, Ferdinando, Delle Rose, Giacomo, Pitino, Dario, Ferretti, Andrea.
Calcific tendinitis of the shoulder. Joints; 2014.
2. Talamo, Giampaolo, Angtuaco, Edgardo, Walker, Ronald C., Dong, Li, Miceli, Marisa H.,
Zangari, Maurizio, Tricot, Guido, Barlogie, Bart, Anaissie, Elias. Avascular necrosis of femoral
and/or humeral heads in multiple myeloma: results of a prospective study of patients treated
with dexamethasone-based regimens and high-dose chemotherapy. J Clin Oncology; 2005.
3. Lee, Hyun Il, Shon, Min Soo, Koh, Kyoung Hwan, Lim, Tae Kang, Heo, Jaewon, Yoo, Jae Chul.
Clinical and radiologic results of arthroscopic biceps tenodesis with suture anchor in the
setting of rotator cuff tear. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery; 2014.
4. Codman, EA. Rupture of the supraspinatus tendon. Clin Orthop Relat Res; 1911.
5. Codman, EA. Complete rupture of the supraspinatus tendon. Operative treatment with
report of two successful cases. Boston Med Surg J; 1911.
6. Codman, EA. Obscure lesions of the shoulder rupture of the supraspinatus tendon. Boston
Med Surg J; 1927.
7. Wilson, C.., Duff, G, . Pathologic study of degeneration and rupture of the supraspinatus
tendon. Archives of Surgery; 1943.
8. Olsson, O. Degenerative changes of the shoulder joint and their connection with shoulder
pain; a morphological and clinical investigation with special attention to the cuff and biceps
tendon. Acta Chir Scand Suppl; 1953.
9. Keyes, EL. Observations on rupture of supraspinatus tendon. Based upon a study of 73
cadavers. Ann Surg; 1933.
10. Keyes, EL, . Anatomical observations on senile change in the shoulder. J Bone Joint Surg;
1935.
11. Von Meyer, AW. Chronic functional lesions of the shoulder. Arch Surg; 1937.
12. Skinner, H. Anatomical considerations relative to rupture of the supraspinatus tendon. J
Bone Joint Surg; 1937.
13. Cotton, R. E., Rideout, D. F. Tears of the Humeral Rotator Cuff; a Radiological and
Pathological Necropsy Survey. J Bone Joint Surg Br; May 1964.
14. Macnab, I. Rotator cuff tendinitis. Ann R Coll Surg Engl; Nov 1973.
15. Okoroha, Kelechi R, Lynch, Jonathan R, Keller, Robert A, Korona, John, Amato, Chad, Rill,
Brian, Kolowich, Patricia A, Muh, Stephanie J. Liposomal bupivacaine versus interscalene
nerve block for pain control after shoulder arthroplasty: a prospective randomized trial.
Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2016.
16. Schellingerhout, J. M., Verhagen, A. P., Thomas, S., Koes, B. W. Lack of uniformity in
diagnostic labeling of shoulder pain: time for a different approach. Man Ther; Dec 2008.
17. Neer, C. S.,2nd, Kirby, R. M. Revision of humeral head and total shoulder arthroplasties.
Clin Orthop Relat Res; Oct 1982.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

688

18. Neumann, J. A., Zgonis, M. H., Rickert, K. D., Bradley, K. E., Kremen, T. J., Boggess, B. R.,
Toth, A. P. Interposition Dermal Matrix Xenografts: A Successful Alternative to Traditional
Treatment of Massive Rotator Cuff Tears. Am J Sports Med; May 2017.
19. Ishii, H., Brunet, J. A., Welsh, R. P., Uhthoff, H. K. &quot;Bursal reaction&quot; in rotator
cuff tearing, the impingement syndrome, and calcifying tendinitis. J Shoulder Elbow Surg;
1997.
20. Chard, M. D., Cawston, T. E., Riley, G. P., Gresham, G. A., Hazleman, B. L. Rotator cuff
degeneration and lateral epicondylitis: a comparative histological study. Ann Rheum Dis; Jan
1994.
21. Belling Sorensen, A. K., Jorgensen, U. Secondary impingement in the shoulder. An
improved terminology in impingement. Scand J Med Sci Sports; Oct 2000.
22. Itoi, E., Minagawa, H., Yamamoto, N., Seki, N., Abe, H. Are pain location and physical
examinations useful in locating a tear site of the rotator cuff?. Am J Sports Med; Feb 2006.
23. Lindblom, K, Palmer, I. Ruptures of the tendon aponeurosis of the shoulder joint---the socalled supraspinatus ruptures. Acta Chir Scand; 1939.
24. Rathbun, J. B., Macnab, I. The microvascular pattern of the rotator cuff. J Bone Joint Surg
Br; Aug 1970.
25. Moseley, H. F. The vascular supply of the rotator cuff. Surg Clin North Am; Dec 1963.
26. Rothman, R. H., Parke, W. W. The vascular anatomy of the rotator cuff. Clin Orthop Relat
Res; Jul-Aug 1965.
27. Chansky, H. A., Iannotti, J. P. The vascularity of the rotator cuff. Clin Sports Med; Oct 1991.
28. Brooks, C. H., Revell, W. J., Heatley, F. W. A quantitative histological study of the
vascularity of the rotator cuff tendon. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Jan 1992.
29. Applegate, Kara Arnold, Thiese, Matthew S, Merryweather, Andrew S, Kapellusch, Jay,
Drury, David L, Wood, Eric, Kendall, Richard, Foster, James, Garg, Arun, Hegmann, Kurt T.
Association between cardiovascular disease risk factors and rotator cuff tendinopathy: a
cross-sectional study. Journal of occupational and environmental medicine; 2017.
30. Viikari-Juntura, EJ, Vuori, J, Silverstein, B, Kalimo, R, Kuosma, E, Videman, T. A life-long
prospective study on the role of psychosocial factors in neck-shoulder and low back pain.
Spine; 1991.
31. Morken, T., Moen, B., Riise, T., Bergum, O., Bua, L., Hauge, S. H., Holien, S., Langedrag, A.,
Olson, H. O., Pedersen, S., Saue, I. L., Seljebo, G. M., Thoppil, V. Prevalence of musculoskeletal
symptoms among aluminium workers. Occup Med (Lond); Aug 2000.
32. Silverstein, B. A., Bao, S. S., Fan, Z. J., Howard, N., Smith, C., Spielholz, P., Bonauto, D.,
Viikari-Juntura, E. Rotator cuff syndrome: personal, work-related psychosocial and physical
load factors. J Occup Environ Med; Sep 2008.
33. Miranda, H., Viikari-Juntura, E., Martikainen, R., Takala, E. P., Riihimaki, H. A prospective
study of work related factors and physical exercise as predictors of shoulder pain. Occup
Environ Med; Aug 2001.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

689

34. Miranda, H., Viikari-Juntura, E., Heistaro, S., Heliovaara, M., Riihimaki, H. A population
study on differences in the determinants of a specific shoulder disorder versus nonspecific
shoulder pain without clinical findings. Am J Epidemiol; May 1 2005.
35. Luime, J. J., Verhagen, A. P., Miedema, H. S., Kuiper, J. I., Burdorf, A., Verhaar, J. A., Koes,
B. W. Does this patient have an instability of the shoulder or a labrum lesion?. Jama; Oct 27
2004.
36. Wendelboe, A. M., Hegmann, K. T., Gren, L. H., Alder, S. C., White, G. L.,Jr., Lyon, J. L.
Associations between body-mass index and surgery for rotator cuff tendinitis. J Bone Joint
Surg Am; Apr 2004.
37. Skov, T., Borg, V., Orhede, E. Psychosocial and physical risk factors for musculoskeletal
disorders of the neck, shoulders, and lower back in salespeople. Occup Environ Med; May
1996.
38. Stenlund, B., Goldie, I., Hagberg, M., Hogstedt, C. Shoulder tendinitis and its relation to
heavy manual work and exposure to vibration. Scand J Work Environ Health; Feb 1993.
39. Kane, S. M., Dave, A., Haque, A., Langston, K. The incidence of rotator cuff disease in
smoking and non-smoking patients: a cadaveric study. Orthopedics; Apr 2006.
40. Kaergaard, A., Andersen, J. H. Musculoskeletal disorders of the neck and shoulders in
female sewing machine operators: prevalence, incidence, and prognosis. Occup Environ Med;
Aug 2000.
41. Meyer, AW. Further observation upon use-destruction in joints. J Bone Joint Surg; 1922.
42. Meyer, AW. Furhter evidences of attrition in the human body. Am J Anat; 1924.
43. Meyer, AW. Spontaneous dislocation of the tendon of the long head of the biceps brachii.
Arch Surg; 1926.
44. Neer, C. S.,2nd. Anterior acromioplasty for the chronic impingement syndrome in the
shoulder: a preliminary report. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jan 1972.
45. Milgrom, C., Schaffler, M., Gilbert, S., van Holsbeeck, M. Rotator-cuff changes in
asymptomatic adults. The effect of age, hand dominance and gender. J Bone Joint Surg Br;
Mar 1995.
46. Worland, RL, Lee, D, Orozco, CG, Soza-Rex, F, Keenan, J. Correlation of age, acromial
morphology, and rotator cuff tear pathology diagnosed by ultrasound in asymptomatic
patients. J South Orthop Assoc; 2003.
47. Zuckerman, JD, Cuomo, F., Rokito, S. Definition and classification of frozen shoulder: a
consensus approach. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; 1994.
48. Bigliani, L. U., Ticker, J. B., Flatow, E. L., Soslowsky, L. J., Mow, V. C. The relationship of
acromial architecture to rotator cuff disease. Clin Sports Med; Oct 1991.
49. Neer, C. S.,2nd. Nonunion of the clavicle. J Am Med Assoc; Mar 5 1960.
50. Bonsell, S., Pearsall, A. W. th, Heitman, R. J., Helms, C. A., Major, N. M., Speer, K. P. The
relationship of age, gender, and degenerative changes observed on radiographs of the
shoulder in asymptomatic individuals. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Nov 2000.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

690

51. Viikari-Juntura, E., Shiri, R., Solovieva, S., Karppinen, J., Leino-Arjas, P., Varonen, H., Kalso,
E., Ukkola, O. Risk factors of atherosclerosis and shoulder pain--is there an association? A
systematic review. Eur J Pain; May 2008.
52. Katthagen, J Christoph, Vap, Alexander R, Tahal, Dimitri S, Horan, Marilee P, Millett, Peter
J. Arthroscopic repair of isolated partial-and full-thickness upper third subscapularis tendon
tears: Minimum 2-year outcomes after single-anchor repair and biceps tenodesis.
Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery; 2017.
53. Needell, SD, Zlatkin, MB, Sher, JS, Murphy, BJ, Uribe, JW. MR imaging of the rotator cuff:
peritendinous and bone abnormalities in an asymptomatic population. Am J Roentgenol;
1996.
54. Reilly, P, MacLeod, I, MacFarland, R, Windley, J, Emery, RJH. Dead men and radiologists
don&#x27;t lie: a review of cadaveric and radiological studies of rotator cuff tear prevalance.
Ann Royal College of Surg Engl; 2006.
55. Lewis, J. S. Rotator cuff tendinopathy/subacromial impingement syndrome: is it time for
a new method of assessment?. Br J Sports Med; Apr 2009.
56. Sher, JS, Uribe, JW, Posada, A, Murphy, BJ, Zlatkin, MB. Abnormal findings on magnetic
resonance images of asymptomatic shoulders. J Bone Joint Surg Am; 1995.
57. Yamamoto, N., Muraki, T., Sperling, J. W., Steinmann, S. P., Itoi, E., Cofield, R. H., An, K. N.
Impingement mechanisms of the Neer and Hawkins signs. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Nov-Dec
2009.
58. Yamamoto, A., Takagishi, K., Osawa, T., Yanagawa, T., Nakajima, D., Shitara, H., Kobayashi,
T. Prevalence and risk factors of a rotator cuff tear in the general population. J Shoulder Elbow
Surg; Jan 2010.
59. Tempelhof, S, Rupp, S, Seil, R. Age-related prevalence of rotator cuff tears in
asymptomatic shoulders. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; 1999.
60. Schibany, N, Zehetgruber, H, Kainberger, F, Wurnig, C, Ba-Ssalamah, A, Herneth, AM, Lang,
T, Gruber, D, Breitenseher, MJ. Rotator cuff tears in asymptomatic individuals: a clinical and
ultrasonographic screening study. Eur J Radiol; 2004.
61. Sakurai, G., Ozaki, J., Tomita, Y., Nakagawa, Y., Kondo, T., Tamai, S. Morphologic changes
in long head of biceps brachii in rotator cuff dysfunction. J Orthop Sci; 1998.
62. Linsell, L., Dawson, J., Zondervan, K., Rose, P., Randall, T., Fitzpatrick, R., Carr, A.
Prevalence and incidence of adults consulting for shoulder conditions in UK primary care;
patterns of diagnosis and referral. Rheumatology (Oxford); Feb 2006.
63. Cassou, B., Derriennic, F., Monfort, C., Norton, J., Touranchet, A. Chronic neck and
shoulder pain, age, and working conditions: longitudinal results from a large random sample
in France. Occup Environ Med; Aug 2002.
64. Roquelaure, Y., Ha, C., Leclerc, A., Touranchet, A., Sauteron, M., Melchior, M., Imbernon,
E., Goldberg, M. Epidemiologic surveillance of upper-extremity musculoskeletal disorders in
the working population. Arthritis Rheum; Oct 15 2006.
65. Clayton, R. A., Court-Brown, C. M. The epidemiology of musculoskeletal tendinous and
ligamentous injuries. Injury; Dec 2008.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

691

66. Yamaguchi, K., Ditsios, K., Middleton, W. D., Hildebolt, C. F., Galatz, L. M., Teefey, S. A. The
demographic and morphological features of rotator cuff disease. A comparison of
asymptomatic and symptomatic shoulders. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Aug 2006.
67. Moosmayer, S., Smith, H. J., Tariq, R., Larmo, A. Prevalence and characteristics of
asymptomatic tears of the rotator cuff: an ultrasonographic and clinical study. J Bone Joint
Surg Br; Feb 2009.
68. Miniaci, A., Dowdy, P. A., Willits, K. R., Vellet, A. D. Magnetic resonance imaging evaluation
of the rotator cuff tendons in the asymptomatic shoulder. Am J Sports Med; Mar-Apr 1995.
69. Travell, J. G,D. G Simons,and L. S Simons. Myofascial Pain And Dysfunction. 1999.
70. Dickson, J. A. .., Crosby, E. H., . Periarthritis of the shoulder-an analysis of 200 cases. J
Amner Med. Assoc; 1932.
71. Lippmann, RK. Frozen shoulder; periarthritis; bicipital tenosynovitis. Arch Surg; 1943.
72. Kuye, Ifedayo O., Jain, Nitin B., Warner, Lauren, Herndon, James H., Warner, Jon J. P.
Economic evaluations in shoulder pathologies: a systematic review of the literature. Journal
of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2012.
73. Greving, K., Dorrestijn, O., Winters, J. C., Groenhof, F., van der Meer, K., Stevens, M.,
Diercks, R. L. Incidence, prevalence, and consultation rates of shoulder complaints in general
practice. Scand J Rheumatol; Mar 2012.
74. Adamson, J., Ebrahim, S., Dieppe, P., Hunt, K. Prevalence and risk factors for joint pain
among men and women in the West of Scotland Twenty-07 study. Ann Rheum Dis; Apr 2006.
75. Urwin, M., Symmons, D., Allison, T., Brammah, T., Busby, H., Roxby, M., Simmons, A.,
Williams, G. Estimating the burden of musculoskeletal disorders in the community: the
comparative prevalence of symptoms at different anatomical sites, and the relation to social
deprivation. Ann Rheum Dis; Nov 1998.
76. Chard, M. D., Hazleman, R., Hazleman, B. L., King, R. H., Reiss, B. B. Shoulder disorders in
the elderly: a community survey. Arthritis Rheum; Jun 1991.
77. Bongers, P. M. The cost of shoulder pain at work. Bmj; Jan 13 2001.
78. Speed, C. A. Fortnightly review: Corticosteroid injections in tendon lesions. Br Med J; Aug
18 2001.
79. Dinnes, J., Loveman, E., McIntyre, L., Waugh, N. The effectiveness of diagnostic tests for
the assessment of shoulder pain due to soft tissue disorders: a systematic review. Health
Technol Assess; 2003.
80. Silverstein, B., Viikari-Juntura, E., Kalat, J. Use of a prevention index to identify industries
at high risk for work-related musculoskeletal disorders of the neck, back, and upper extremity
in Washington state, 1990-1998. Am J Ind Med; Mar 2002.
81. Punnett, L. The costs of work-related musculoskeletal disorders in automotive
manufacturing. New Solut; 1999.
82. Waehrer, G., Leigh, J. P., Miller, T. R. Costs of occupational injury and illness within the
health services sector. Int J Health Serv; 2005.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

692

83. Brown, N. D., Thomas, N. I. Exploring variables among medical center employees with
injuries: developing interventions and strategies. Aaohn J; Nov 2003.
84. Meislin, R. J., Sperling, J. W., Stitik, T. P. Persistent shoulder pain: epidemiology,
pathophysiology, and diagnosis. Am J Orthop (Belle Mead NJ); Dec 2005.
85. Council, N. S. Worker&#x27;s Compensation Costs. 2019.
86. Hughes, R. E., Silverstein, B. A., Evanoff, B. A. Risk factors for work-related musculoskeletal
disorders in an aluminum smelter. Am J Ind Med; Jul 1997.
87. Rhode, BA, Rhode, WS. IRetrospective comparison of a novel-triple row to modified
mason allen rotator cuff repair in a worker’s comp population MOJ Orthop Rheumatol. 2015;
3 (1): 252‒256.
88. Viola, R. W., Boatright, K. C., Smith, K. L., Sidles, J. A., Matsen, F. A.,3rd. Do shoulder
patients insured by workers&#x27; compensation present with worse self-assessed function
and health status?. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Sep-Oct 2000.
89. Holtby, R., Razmjou, H. Impact of work-related compensation claims on surgical outcome
of patients with rotator cuff related pathologies: a matched case-control study. J Shoulder
Elbow Surg; Apr 2010.
90. Frieman, B. G. and J. M. Fenlin,Jr. Anterior acromioplasty: effect of litigation and
workers&#x27; compensation. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; 1995.
91. Misamore, G. W., Ziegler, D. W., Rushton, J. L.,2nd. Repair of the rotator cuff. A
comparison of results in two populations of patients. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Sep 1995.
92. Koljonen, P., Chong, C., Yip, D. Difference in outcome of shoulder surgery between
workers&#x27; compensation and nonworkers&#x27; compensation populations. Int Orthop;
Apr 2009.
93. Smith, K. L., Harryman, D. T.,2nd, Antoniou, J., Campbell, B., Sidles, J. A., Matsen, F. A.,3rd.
A prospective, multipractice study of shoulder function and health status in patients with
documented rotator cuff tears. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Sep-Oct 2000.
94. Henn, R. F.,3rd,et al. Patients with workers&#x27; compensation claims have worse
outcomes after rotator cuff repair. J Bone Joint Surg Am; 2008.
95. Croft, P., Pope, D., Silman, A. The clinical course of shoulder pain: prospective cohort study
in primary care. Primary Care Rheumatology Society Shoulder Study Group. Bmj; Sep 7 1996.
96. van der Windt, D. A., Koes, B. W., de Jong, B. A., Bouter, L. M. Shoulder disorders in general
practice: incidence, patient characteristics, and management. Ann Rheum Dis; Dec 1995.
97. van der Windt, D. A., van der Heijden, G. J., van den Berg, S. G., ter Riet, G., de Winter, A.
F., Bouter, L. M. Ultrasound therapy for musculoskeletal disorders: a systematic review. Pain;
Jun 1999.
98. Winters, J. C., Sobel, J. S., Groenier, K. H., Arendzen, J. H., Meyboom-De Jong, B. A shoulder
pain score: a comprehensive questionnaire for assessing pain in patients with shoulder
complaints. Scand J Rehabil Med; Sep 1996.
99. Winters, J. C., Jorritsma, W., Groenier, K. H., Sobel, J. S., Meyboom-de Jong, B., Arendzen,
H. J. Treatment of shoulder complaints in general practice: long term results of a randomised,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

693

single blind study comparing physiotherapy, manipulation, and corticosteroid injection. Bmj;
May 22 1999.
100. Macfarlane, G. J., Hunt, I. M., Silman, A. J. Predictors of chronic shoulder pain: a
population based prospective study. J Rheumatol; Aug 1998.
101. Gartsman, G. M.,et al. Self-assessment of general health status in patients with five
common shoulder conditions. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; 1998.
102. Largacha, M., Parsons, I. M. th, Campbell, B., Titelman, R. M., Smith, K. L., Matsen, F.,3rd.
Deficits in shoulder function and general health associated with sixteen common shoulder
diagnoses: a study of 2674 patients. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jan-Feb 2006.
103. Harryman, D. T.,2nd,et al. A prospective multipractice investigation of patients with fullthickness rotator cuff tears: the importance of comorbidities, practice, and other covariables
on self-assessed shoulder function and health status. J Bone Joint Surg Am; 2003.
104. Silverstein, B. A., Viikari-Juntura, E., Fan, Z. J., Bonauto, D. K., Bao, S., Smith, C. Natural
course of nontraumatic rotator cuff tendinitis and shoulder symptoms in a working
population. Scand J Work Environ Health; Apr 2006.
105. Green, S., Buchbinder, R., Glazier, R., Forbes, A. Systematic review of randomised
controlled trials of interventions for painful shoulder: selection criteria, outcome assessment,
and efficacy. Bmj; Jan 31 1998.
106. Mannion, A. F., Muntener, M., Taimela, S., Dvorak, J. Comparison of three active
therapies for chronic low back pain: results of a randomized clinical trial with one-year followup. Rheumatology; Jul 2001.
107. Kankaanpaa, M., Taimela, S., Airaksinen, O., Hanninen, O. The efficacy of active
rehabilitation in chronic low back pain. Effect on pain intensity, self-experienced disability,
and lumbar fatigability. Spine (Phila Pa 1976); May 15 1999.
108. Cohen, I., Rainville, J. Aggressive exercise as treatment for chronic low back pain. Sports
Med; 2002.
109. Danielsen, J. M., Johnsen, R., Kibsgaard, S. K., Hellevik, E. Early aggressive exercise for
postoperative rehabilitation after discectomy. Spine; Apr 15 2000.
110. Gross, D. P., Battié, M. C. Does functional capacity evaluation predict recovery in
workers&#x27; compensation claimants with upper extremity disorders?. Occup Environ
Med; Jun 2006.
111. Hahne, A. J., Ford, J. J. Functional restoration for a chronic lumbar disk extrusion with
associated radiculopathy. Phys Ther; Dec 2006.
112. Poiraudeau, S., Rannou, F., Revel, M. Functional restoration programs for low back pain:
a systematic review. Ann Readapt Med Phys; Jul 2007.
113. Khan, K. M., Cook, J. L., Taunton, J. E., Bonar, F. Overuse tendinosis, not tendinitis part 1:
a new paradigm for a difficult clinical problem. Phys Sportsmed; May 2000.
114. Constant, C. R., Murley, A. H. A clinical method of functional assessment of the shoulder.
Clin Orthop Relat Res; Jan 1987.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

694

115. Williams, G. N., Gangel, T. J., Arciero, R. A., Uhorchak, J. M., Taylor, D. C. Comparison of
the single assessment numeric evaluation method and two shoulder rating scales. Outcomes
measures after shoulder surgery. Am J Sports MEd; Mar-Apr 1999.
116. Godfrey, J., Hamman, R., Lowenstein, S., Briggs, K., Kocher, M. Reliability, validity, and
responsiveness of the simple shoulder test: psychometric properties by age and injury type. J
Shoulder Elbow Surg; May-Jun 2007.
117. Beaton, D. E., Richards, R. R. Measuring function of the shoulder. A cross-sectional
comparison of five questionnaires. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jun 1996.
118. Beaton, D., Richards, R. R. Assessing the reliability and responsiveness of 5 shoulder
questionnaires. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Nov-Dec 1998.
119. Beaton, D. E., Katz, J. N., Fossel, A. H., Wright, J. G., Tarasuk, V., Bombardier, C. Measuring
the whole or the parts? Validity, reliability, and responsiveness of the Disabilities of the Arm,
Shoulder and Hand outcome measure in different regions of the upper extremity. J Hand Ther;
Apr-Jun 2001.
120. Beaton, D. E., Schemitsch, E. Measures of health-related quality of life and physical
function. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Aug 2003.
121. Bot, S. D., Terwee, C. B., van der Windt, D. A., Bouter, L. M., Dekker, J., de Vet, H. C.
Clinimetric evaluation of shoulder disability questionnaires: a systematic review of the
literature. Ann Rheum Dis; Apr 2004.
122. Cook, K. F., Gartsman, G. M., Roddey, T. S., Olson, S. L. The measurement level and traitspecific reliability of 4 scales of shoulder functioning: an empiric investigation. Arch Phys Med
Rehabil; Nov 2001.
123. Kirkley, A., Litchfield, R., Thain, L., Spouge, A. Agreement between magnetic resonance
imaging and arthroscopic evaluation of the shoulder joint in primary anterior dislocation of
the shoulder. Clin J Sport Med; May 2003.
124. Kocher, M. S., Horan, M. P., Briggs, K. K., Richardson, T. R., O'Holleran, J., Hawkins, R. J.
Reliability, validity, and responsiveness of the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons
subjective shoulder scale in patients with shoulder instability, rotator cuff disease, and
glenohumeral arthritis. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Sep 2005.
125. L'Insalata, J. C., Warren, R. F., Cohen, S. B., Altchek, D. W., Peterson, M. G. A selfadministered questionnaire for assessment of symptoms and function of the shoulder. J Bone
Joint Surg Am; May 1997.
126. Lippitt, SB, Harryman, DT, Matsen, FA III. A practical tool for evaluating function: The
simple shoulder test. The Shoulder: A Balance of Mobility and Stability; 1993.
127. Lohr, K. N., Aaronson, N. K., Alonso, J., Burnam, M. A., Patrick, D. L., Perrin, E. B., Roberts,
J. S. Evaluating quality-of-life and health status instruments: development of scientific review
criteria. Clin Ther; Sep-Oct 1996.
128. Ohlsson, K., Hansson, G. A., Balogh, I., Stromberg, U., Palsson, B., Nordander, C.,
Rylander, L., Skerfving, S. Disorders of the neck and upper limbs in women in the fish
processing industry. Occup Environ Med; Dec 1994.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

695

129. Michener, L. A., McClure, P. W., Sennett, B. J. American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons
Standardized Shoulder Assessment Form, patient self-report section: reliability, validity, and
responsiveness. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Nov-Dec 2002.
130. Roach, K. E., Budiman-Mak, E., Songsiridej, N., Lertratanakul, Y. Development of a
shoulder pain and disability index. Arthritis Care Res; Dec 1991.
131. Roddey, T. S., Olson, S. L., Cook, K. F., Gartsman, G. M., Hanten, W. Comparison of the
University of California-Los Angeles Shoulder Scale and the Simple Shoulder Test with the
shoulder pain and disability index: single-administration reliability and validity. Phys Ther; Aug
2000.
132. Leggin, B. G., Michener, L. A., Shaffer, M. A., Brenneman, S. K., Iannotti, J. P., Williams,
G. R.,Jr. The Penn shoulder score: reliability and validity. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther; Mar 2006.
133. Gabel, C. P., Michener, L. A., Burkett, B., Neller, A. The Upper Limb Functional Index:
development and determination of reliability, validity, and responsiveness. J Hand Ther; JulSep 2006.
134. Gabel, C. P., Yelland, M., Melloh, M., Burkett, B. A modified QuickDASH-9 provides a valid
outcome instrument for upper limb function. BMC Musculoskelet Disord; 2009.
135. Dawson, J., Fitzpatrick, R., Carr, A. The assessment of shoulder instability. The
development and validation of a questionnaire. J Bone Joint Surg Br; May 1999.
136. Richardson, A. B. Thoracic outlet syndrome in aquatic athletes. Clin Sports Med; Apr
1999.
137. Lynch, NT,Clay,RL,Hegmann,KT,et al. Advocagenic Illness: Proposed Term, Case Reports,
and Estimates of Prevalence. JOEM; 1998.
138. Tennent, T. D., Beach, W. R., Meyers, J. F. A review of the special tests associated with
shoulder examination. Part II: laxity, instability, and superior labral anterior and posterior
(SLAP) lesions. Am J Sports Med; Mar-Apr 2003.
139. Mirkovic, Milena, Green, Rod, Taylor, Nicholas, Perrott, Margrett. Accuracy of clinical
tests to diagnose superior labral anterior and posterior (SLAP) lesions. Physical Therapy
Reviews; 2005.
140. Walton, D. M., Sadi, J. Identifying SLAP lesions: a meta-analysis of clinical tests and
exercise in clinical reasoning. Phys Ther Sport; Nov 2008.
141. Wilk, K. E., Reinold, M. M., Dugas, J. R., Arrigo, C. A., Moser, M. W., Andrews, J. R. Current
concepts in the recognition and treatment of superior labral (SLAP) lesions. J Orthop Sports
Phys Ther; May 2005.
142. Berg, E. E., Ciullo, J. V. A clinical test for superior glenoid labral or &#x27;SLAP&#x27;
lesions. Clinical Journal Of Sport Medicine: Official Journal Of The Canadian Academy Of Sport
Medicine; Apr 1998.
143. Holtby, R., Razmjou, H. Accuracy of the Speed&#x27;s and Yergason&#x27;s tests in
detecting biceps pathology and SLAP lesions: comparison with arthroscopic findings.
Arthroscopy; Mar 2004.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

696

144. Ben Kibler, W., Sciascia, A. D., Hester, P., Dome, D., Jacobs, C. Clinical utility of traditional
and new tests in the diagnosis of biceps tendon injuries and superior labrum anterior and
posterior lesions in the shoulder. Am J Sports Med; Sep 2009.
145. Myers, TH, Zemanovic, JR, Andrews, JR. The resisted supination external rotation test: a
new test for the diagnosis of superior labral anterior posterior lesions. American Journal of
Sports Medicine; Sep 2005.
146. Mimori, K., Muneta, T., Nakagawa, T., Shinomiya, K. A new pain provocation test for
superior labral tears of the shoulder. Am J Sports Med; Mar-Apr 1999.
147. Ebinger, N., Magosch, P., Lichtenberg, S., Habermeyer, P. A new SLAP test: the supine
flexion resistance test. Arthroscopy: The Journal Of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery:
Official Publication Of The Arthroscopy Association Of North America And The International
Arthroscopy Association; May 2008.
148. Stetson, W. B., Templin, K. The crank test, the O&#x27;Brien test, and routine magnetic
resonance imaging scans in the diagnosis of labral tears. Am J Sports Med; Nov-Dec 2002.
149. Liu, SH, Henry, MH, Nuccion, SL. A prospective evaluation of a new physical examination
in predicting glenoid labral tears. American Journal of Sports Medicine; Nov-Dec 1996.
150. Swaringen, J. C., Mell, A. G., Langenderfer, J., LaScalza, S., Hughes, R. E., Kuhn, J. E.
Electromyographic analysis of physical examination tests for type II superior labrum anteriorposterior lesions. Journal Of Shoulder And Elbow Surgery / American Shoulder And Elbow
Surgeons [Et Al ]; Sep-Oct 2006.
151. Green, R. A., Taylor, N. F., Mirkovic, M., Perrott, M. An evaluation of the anatomic basis
of the O&#x27;Brien active compression test for superior labral anterior and posterior (SLAP)
lesions. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jan-Feb 2008.
152. Jones, G. L., Galluch, D. B. Clinical assessment of superior glenoid labral lesions: a
systematic review. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Feb 2007.
153. Dessaur, W. A., Magarey, M. E. Diagnostic accuracy of clinical tests for superior labral
anterior posterior lesions: a systematic review. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther; Jun 2008.
154. Calvert, E.,et al. Special physical examination tests for superior labrum anterior posterior
shoulder tears are clinically limited and invalid: a diagnostic systematic review. J Clin
Epidemiol; 2009.
155. Oh, Joo Han, Kim, Jae Yoon, Kim, Woo Sung, Gong, Hyun Sik, Lee, Ji Ho. The evaluation
of various physical examinations for the diagnosis of Type II superior labrum anterior and
posterior lesion. Am J Sports Med; 2008.
156. Rhee, Y. G., Cho, N. S., Cho, S. H. Traumatic anterior dislocation of the shoulder: factors
affecting the progress of the traumatic anterior dislocation. Clin Orthop Surg; Dec 2009.
157. McCaughey, R., Green, R. A., Taylor, N. F. The anatomical basis of the resisted supination
external rotation test for superior labral anterior to posterior lesions. Clinical Anatomy (New
York, N Y ); Sep 2009.
158. Kim, J. M., Lee, S. H., Ahn, Y., Yoon, D. H., Lee, C. D., Lim, S. T. Recurrence after successful
percutaneous endoscopic lumbar discectomy. Minim Invasive Neurosurg; Apr 2007.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

697

159. McClure, P., Tate, A. R., Kareha, S., Irwin, D., Zlupko, E. A clinical method for identifying
scapular dyskinesis, part 1: reliability. J Athl Train; Mar-Apr 2009.
160. Uhl, TL, Kibler, WB, Gecewich, B,et al. Evaluation of clinical assessment methods for
scapular dyskinesis. Arthroscopy; 2009.
161. Hegedus, E.,et al. Physical examination tests of the shoulder: a systematic review with
meta-analysis of individual tests. Br J Sports Med; 2008.
162. Munro, W., Healy, R. The validity and accuracy of clinical tests used to detect labral
pathology of the shoulder--a systematic review. Man Ther; Apr 2009.
163. Beaudreuil, J., Nizard, R., Thomas, T., Peyre, M., Liotard, J. P., Boileau, P., Marc, T.,
Dromard, C., Steyer, E., Bardin, T., Orcel, P., Walch, G. Contribution of clinical tests to the
diagnosis of rotator cuff disease: a systematic literature review. Joint Bone Spine; Jan 2009.
164. Hughes, P. C., Taylor, N. F., Green, R. A. Most clinical tests cannot accurately diagnose
rotator cuff pathology: a systematic review. Aust J Physiother; 2008.
165. Park, H. B., Yokota, A., Gill, H. S., El Rassi, G., McFarland, E.G. Diagnostic accuracy of
clinical tests for the different degrees of subacromial impingement syndrome. J Bone Joint
Surg Am; Jul 2005.
166. Silva, L., Andreu, J. L., Munoz, P., Pastrana, M., Millan, I., Sanz, J., Barbadillo, C.,
Fernandez-Castro, M. Accuracy of physical examination in subacromial impingement
syndrome. Rheumatology (Oxford); May 2008.
167. Hanchard, N. C., Lenza, M., Handoll, H. H., Takwoingi, Y. Physical tests for shoulder
impingements and local lesions of bursa, tendon or labrum that may accompany
impingement. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2013.
168. Doxey, Robert, Thiese, Matt S, Hegmann, Kurt T. Reliability of common provocative tests
for shoulder tendinitis. Journal of occupational and environmental medicine; 2018.
169. Farber, A. J., Castillo, R., Clough, M., Bahk, M., McFarland, E.G. Clinical assessment of
three common tests for traumatic anterior shoulder instability. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jul 2006.
170. Lo, I. K., Nonweiler, B., Woolfrey, M., Litchfield, R., Kirkley, A. An evaluation of the
apprehension, relocation, and surprise tests for anterior shoulder instability. Am J Sports Med;
Mar 2004.
171. Gerber, C., Ganz, R. Clinical assessment of instability of the shoulder. With special
reference to anterior and posterior drawer tests. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Aug 1984.
172. Gross, M. L., Distefano, M. C. Anterior release test. A new test for occult shoulder
instability. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Jun 1997.
173. Nakagawa, S., Yoneda, M., Hayashida, K., Obata, M., Fukushima, S., Miyazaki, Y. Forced
shoulder abduction and elbow flexion test: a new simple clinical test to detect superior labral
injury in the throwing shoulder. Arthroscopy; Nov 2005.
174. Speer, KP, Hannafin, JA, Altchek, DW, Warren, RF. An evaluation of the shoulder
relocation test. Am J Sports Med; 1994.
175. Pandya, N. K., Colton, A., Webner, D., Sennett, B., Huffman, G. R. Physical examination
and magnetic resonance imaging in the diagnosis of superior labrum anterior-posterior
lesions of the shoulder: a sensitivity analysis. Arthroscopy; Mar 2008.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

698

176. Safran, M. R. Nerve injury about the shoulder in athletes, part 2: long thoracic nerve,
spinal accessory nerve, burners/stingers, thoracic outlet syndrome. Am J Sports Med; Jun
2004.
177. Mackinnon, S. E., Novak, C. B. Thoracic outlet syndrome. Curr Probl Surg; Nov 2002.
178. Nord, K. M., Kapoor, P., Fisher, J., Thomas, G., Sundaram, A., Scott, K., Kothari, M. J. False
positive rate of thoracic outlet syndrome diagnostic maneuvers. Electromyogr Clin
Neurophysiol; Mar 2008.
179. O'Brien, S. J., Pagnani, M. J., Fealy, S., McGlynn, S. R., Wilson, J. B. The active compression
test: a new and effective test for diagnosing labral tears and acromioclavicular joint
abnormality. Am J Sports Med; Sep-Oct 1998.
180. Chronopoulos, E.,et al. Diagnostic value of physical tests for isolated chronic
acromioclavicular lesions. Am J Sports Med; 2004.
181. Calis, M.,et al. Diagnostic values of clinical diagnostic tests in subacromial impingement
syndrome. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; 2000.
182. Michener, L. A., Walsworth, M. K., Doukas, W. C., Murphy, K. P. Reliability and diagnostic
accuracy of 5 physical examination tests and combination of tests for subacromial
impingement. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Nov 2009.
183. McGee, S. Examination of the musculoskeletal system: the shoulder. Evidence-based
Physical Diagnosis, 2nd Edtion; 2007.
184. Zaslav, K. R. Internal rotation resistance strength test: a new diagnostic test to
differentiate intra-articular pathology from outlet (Neer) impingement syndrome in the
shoulder. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jan-Feb 2001.
185. Murrell, G. A., Walton, J. R. Diagnosis of rotator cuff tears. Lancet; Mar 10 2001.
186. Hertel, R.,et al. Lag signs in the diagnosis of rotator cuff rupture. J Shoulder Elbow Surg;
1996.
187. MacDonald, P. B., Clark, P., Sutherland, K. An analysis of the diagnostic accuracy of the
Hawkins and Neer subacromial impingement signs. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jul-Aug 2000.
188. Parentis, M. A., Glousman, R. E., Mohr, K. S., Yocum, L. A. An evaluation of the
provocative tests for superior labral anterior posterior lesions. Am J Sports Med; Feb 2006.
189. Boileau, P., Ahrens, P. M., Hatzidakis, A. M. Entrapment of the long head of the biceps
tendon: the hourglass biceps--a cause of pain and locking of the shoulder. J Shoulder Elbow
Surg; May-Jun 2004.
190. Litaker, D., Pioro, M., El Bilbeisi, H., Brems, J. Returning to the bedside: using the history
and physical examination to identify rotator cuff tears. J Am Geriatr Soc; Dec 2000.
191. Itoi, E., Kido, T., Sano, A., Urayama, M., Sato, K. Which is more useful, the &quot;full can
test&quot; or the &quot;empty can test,&quot; in detecting the torn supraspinatus tendon?.
Am J Sports Med; Jan-Feb 1999.
192. Leroux, J. L., Thomas, E., Bonnel, F., Blotman, F. Diagnostic value of clinical tests for
shoulder impingement syndrome. Rev Rhum Engl Ed; Jun 1995.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

699

193. Codman, EA. The shoulder: rupture of the supraspinatus tendon and other lesions in or
about the subacromial bursa. Miller &amp; Medical; 1934.
194. Wolf, E. M., Agrawal, V. Transdeltoid palpation (the rent test) in the diagnosis of rotator
cuff tears. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Sep-Oct 2001.
195. Lyons, A. R., Tomlinson, J. E. Clinical diagnosis of tears of the rotator cuff. J Bone Joint
Surg Br; May 1992.
196. Scheibel, M, Magosch, P, Pritsch, M, Lichtenberg, S, Habermeyer, P. The belly-off sign: a
new clinical diagnostic sign for subscapularis lesions. Arthroscopy; 2005.
197. Miller, C. A., Forrester, G. A., Lewis, J. S. The validity of the lag signs in diagnosing fullthickness tears of the rotator cuff: a preliminary investigation. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Jun
2008.
198. Barth, J. R., Burkhart, S. S., De Beer, J. F. The bear-hug test: a new and sensitive test for
diagnosing a subscapularis tear. Arthroscopy; Oct 2006.
199. Gill, H. S., El Rassi, G., Bahk, M. S., Castillo, R. C., McFarland, E.G. Physical examination
for partial tears of the biceps tendon. Am J Sports Med; Aug 2007.
200. Gerber, C., Krushell, R. J. Isolated rupture of the tendon of the subscapularis muscle.
Clinical features in 16 cases. J Bone Joint Surg Br; May 1991.
201. Tokish, JM, Decker, MJ, Ellis, HB, Torry, MR, Hawkins, RJ. The belly-press test for the
physical examination of hte subscapularis muscle: electromyographic validation and
comparison to the lift-off test. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; 2003.
202. Walch, G., Boulahia, A., Calderone, S., Robinson, A. H. The &#x27;dropping&#x27; and
&#x27;hornblower&#x27;s&#x27; signs in evaluation of rotator-cuff tears. J Bone Joint Surg
Br; Jul 1998.
203. Castoldi, F., Blonna, D., Hertel, R. External rotation lag sign revisited: accuracy for
diagnosis of full thickness supraspinatus tear. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jul-Aug 2009.
204. Heyworth, B. E. and R. J. Williams. Internal impingement of the shoulder. Am J Sports
Med; 2009.
205. Meister, K., Buckley, B., Batts, J. The posterior impingement sign: diagnosis of rotator
cuff and posterior labral tears secondary to internal impingement in overhand athletes. Am J
Orthop (Belle Mead NJ); Aug 2004.
206. Guanche, CA, Jones, DC. Clinical testing for tears of the glenoid labrum. Arthroscopy;
2003.
207. Ardic, F., Kahraman, Y., Kacar, M., Kahraman, M. C., Findikoglu, G., Yorgancioglu, Z. R.
Shoulder impingement syndrome: relationships between clinical, functional, and radiologic
findings. Am J Phys Med Rehabil; Jan 2006.
208. Morgan, C. D., Burkhart, S. S., Palmeri, M., Gillespie, M. Type II SLAP lesions: three
subtypes and their relationships to superior instability and rotator cuff tears. Arthroscopy;
Sep 1998.
209. Tong, H. C., Haig, A. J., Yamakawa, K. The Spurling test and cervical radiculopathy. Spine
(Phila Pa 1976); Jan 15 2002.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

700

210. Woodward, T. W., Best, T. M. The painful shoulder: part I. Clinical evaluation. Am Fam
Physician; May 15 2000.
211. Kim, Yang-Soo, Kim, Jung-Man, Ha, Kee-Yong, Choy, Soon, Joo, Min-Wook, Chung, YangGuk. The Passive Compression Test. Am J Sports Med; Sep 2007.
212. Jia, X., Ji, J. H., Petersen, S. A., Keefer, J., McFarland, E.G. Clinical evaluation of the
shoulder shrug sign. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Nov 2008.
213. Jain, N. B., Luz, J., Higgins, L. D., Dong, Y., Warner, J. J., Matzkin, E., Katz, J. N. The
Diagnostic Accuracy of Special Tests for Rotator Cuff Tear: The ROW Cohort Study. Am J Phys
Med Rehabil; Mar 2017.
214. Kibler, W. B. Specificity and sensitivity of the anterior slide test in throwing athletes with
superior glenoid labral tears. Arthroscopy; Jun 1995.
215. American Medical Association Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. Code of Medical
Ethics: Current Opinions with Annotations, 2002-2003 edition. 2002.
216. Harkness, E. F., Macfarlane, G. J., Nahit, E. S., Silman, A. J., McBeth, J. Mechanical and
psychosocial factors predict new onset shoulder pain: a prospective cohort study of newly
employed workers. Occup Environ Med; Nov 2003.
217. Andersen, J. H., Gaardboe, O. Musculoskeletal disorders of the neck and upper limb
among sewing machine operators: a clinical investigation. Am J Ind Med; Dec 1993.
218. Andersen, J. H., Kaergaard, A., Mikkelsen, S., Jensen, U. F., Frost, P., Bonde, J. P., Fallentin,
N., Thomsen, J. F. Risk factors in the onset of neck/shoulder pain in a prospective study of
workers in industrial and service companies. Occup Environ Med; Sep 2003.
219. Bernard, B., Sauter, S., Fine, L., Petersen, M., Hales, T. Job task and psychosocial risk
factors for work-related musculoskeletal disorders among newspaper employees. Scand J
Work Environ Health; Dec 1994.
220. Burdorf, A. and A. Monster. Exposure to vibration and self-reported health complaints
of riveters in the aircraft industry. Ann Occup Hyg; 1991.
221. Chiang, H. C.,et al. Prevalence of shoulder and upper-limb disorders among workers in
the fish-processing industry. Scand J Work Environ Health; 1993.
222. Flodmark, B. T., Aase, G. Musculoskeletal symptoms and type A behaviour in blue collar
workers. Br J Ind Med; Oct 1992.
223. Hales, TR, Habes, D, Fine, L, Hornung, R, Boiano, J. Hazard Evaluation and Technical
Assistance Report: John Morrell and Co., Sioux Falls, SD. 1989.
224. Hoekstra, EJ, Hurrell, JJ, Swanson, NG. Hazard Evaluation and Technical Assistance
Report: Social Security Administration Teleservice Centers, Boston, MA; Fort Lauderdale, FL.
1994.
225. Ignatius, Y. T., Yee, T. Y., Yan, L. T. Self reported musculoskeletal problems amongst typist
and possible risk factors. J Hum Ergol (Tokyo); Dec 1993.
226. Jonsson, B. Electromyographic studies of job rotation. Scand J Work Environ Health;
1988.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

701

227. Kiken, S, Stringer, W, Fine, L, Sinks, L, Tanaka, S. Health Hazard Evaluation Report No.
HETA-89-307-2009, Perdue Farms, Inc., Lewiston, North Carolina, Robersonville, North
Carolina. 1990.
228. Kilbom, A, Persson, J, Jonsson, B. Risk factors for work-related disorders of the neck and
shoulder with special emphasis on working postures and movements. The Ergonomics of
Working Postures; 1986.
229. Kvarnstrom, S. Occurrence of musculoskeletal, disorders in a manufacturing industry
with special attention to occupational shoulder disorders. Scand J Rehabil Med Suppl; 1983.
230. Magnusson, M. L., Pope, M. H., Wilder, D. G., Areskoug, B. Are occupational drivers at an
increased risk for developing musculoskeletal disorders?. Spine (Phila Pa 1976); Mar 15 1996.
231. Milerad, E., Ekenvall, L. Symptoms of the neck and upper extremities in dentists. Scand J
Work Environ Health; Apr 1990.
232. Ohara, H., Aoyama, H., Itani, T. Health hazard among cash register operators and the
effect of improved working conditions. J Hum Ergol (Tokyo); Sep 1976.
233. Ohlsson, K., Attewell, R., Skerfving, S. Self-reported symptoms in the neck and upper
limbs of female assembly workers. Impact of length of employment, work pace, and selection.
Scand J Work Environ Health; Feb 1989.
234. Onishi, N., Nomura, H., Sakai, K., Yamamoto, T., Hirayama, K., Itani, T. Shoulder muscle
tenderness and physical features of female industrial workers. J Hum Ergol (Tokyo); Dec 1976.
235. Ostergren, P. O., Hanson, B. S., Balogh, I., Ektor-Andersen, J., Isacsson, A., Orbaek, P.,
Winkel, J., Isacsson, S. O. Incidence of shoulder and neck pain in a working population: effect
modification between mechanical and psychosocial exposures at work? Results from a one
year follow up of the Malmo shoulder and neck study cohort. J Epidemiol Community Health;
Sep 2005.
236. Picavet, H. S., Schouten, J. S. Musculoskeletal pain in the Netherlands: prevalences,
consequences and risk groups, the DMC(3)-study. Pain; Mar 2003.
237. Punnett, L., Robins, J. M., Wegman, D. H., Keyserling, W. M. Soft tissue disorders in the
upper limbs of female garment workers. Scand J Work Environ Health; Dec 1985.
238. Rossignol, A. M., Morse, E. P., Summers, V. M., Pagnotto, L. D. Video display terminal use
and reported health symptoms among Massachusetts clerical workers. J Occup Med; Feb
1987.
239. Sakakibara, H., Miyao, M., Kondo, T., Yamada, S., Nakagawa, T., Kobayashi, F. Relation
between overhead work and complaints of pear and apple orchard workers. Ergonomics; May
1987.
240. Sakakibara, H., Miyao, M., Kondo, T., Yamada, S. Overhead work and shoulder-neck pain
in orchard farmers harvesting pears and apples. Ergonomics; Apr 1995.
241. Schibye, B., Skov, T., Ekner, D., Christiansen, J. U., Sjogaard, G. Musculoskeletal
symptoms among sewing machine operators. Scand J Work Environ Health; Dec 1995.
242. Partridge, R. E., Duthie, J. J. Rheumatism in dockers and civil servants. A comparison of
heavy manual and sedentary workers. Ann Rheum Dis; Nov 1968.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

702

243. Ekberg, K.,et al. Cross-sectional study of risk factors for symptoms in the neck and
shoulder area. Ergonomics; 1995.
244. Sweeney, MH, Petersen, M, O’Neill, V. Hazard Evaluation and Technical Assistance
Report: Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf, Ohio Chapter. 1994.
245. Wells, J. A., Zipp, J. F., Schuette, P. T., McEleney, J. Musculoskeletal disorders among
letter carriers. A comparison of weight carrying, walking &amp; sedentary occupations. J
Occup Med; Nov 1983.
246. Hallman, D. M., Holtermann, A., Dencker-Larsen, S., Birk Jorgensen, M., Norregaard
Rasmussen, C. D. Are trajectories of neck-shoulder pain associated with sick leave and work
ability in workers? A 1-year prospective study. BMJ Open; Mar 20 2019.
247. Coenen, P., Douwes, M., van den Heuvel, S., Bosch, T. Towards exposure limits for
working postures and musculoskeletal symptoms - a prospective cohort study. Ergonomics;
Sep 2016.
248. Feleus, A., Miedema, H. S., Bierma-Zeinstra, S. M., Hoekstra, T., Koes, B. W., Burdorf, A.
Sick leave in workers with arm, neck and/or shoulder complaints; defining occurrence and
discriminative trajectories over a 2-year time period. Occup Environ Med; Feb 2017.
249. Fanavoll, R., Nilsen, T. I., Holtermann, A., Mork, P. J. Psychosocial work stress, leisure
time physical exercise and the risk of chronic pain in the neck/shoulders: Longitudinal data
from the Norwegian HUNT Study. Int J Occup Med Environ Health; 2016.
250. Sawada, T., Matsudaira, K., Muto, Y., Koga, T., Takahashi, M. Potential risk factors for
onset of severe neck and shoulder discomfort (Katakori) in urban Japanese workers. Ind
Health; Jun 10 2016.
251. Hallman, D. M., Gupta, N., Mathiassen, S. E., Holtermann, A. Association between
objectively measured sitting time and neck-shoulder pain among blue-collar workers. Int Arch
Occup Environ Health; Nov 2015.
252. Hanvold, T. N., Waersted, M., Mengshoel, A. M., Bjertness, E., Twisk, J., Veiersted, K. B.
A longitudinal study on risk factors for neck and shoulder pain among young adults in the
transition from technical school to working life. Scand J Work Environ Health; Nov 2014.
253. Aaras, A. The impact of ergonomic intervention on individual health and corporate
prosperity in a telecommunications environment. Ergonomics; 1994.
254. Alipour, A., Ghaffari, M., Shariati, B., Jensen, I., Vingard, E. Four-year incidence of sick
leave because of neck and shoulder pain and its association with work and lifestyle. Spine
(Phila Pa 1976); Feb 15 2009.
255. Andersen, J. H., Gaardboe, O. Prevalence of persistent neck and upper limb pain in a
historical cohort of sewing machine operators. Am J Ind Med; Dec 1993.
256. Andersen, Johan Hviid, Kaergaard, Anette, Frost, Poul, Thomsen, Jane Frølund, Bonde,
Jens Peter, Fallentin, Nils, Borg, Vilhelm, Mikkelsen, Sigurd. Physical, psychosocial, and
individual risk factors for neck/shoulder pain with pressure tenderness in the muscles among
workers performing monotonous, repetitive work. Spine; 2002.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

703

257. Bergqvist, U., Wolgast, E., Nilsson, B., Voss, M. Musculoskeletal disorders among visual
display terminal workers: individual, ergonomic, and work organizational factors. Ergonomics;
Apr 1995.
258. Bergqvist, U., Wolgast, E., Nilsson, B., Voss, M. The influence of VDT work on
musculoskeletal disorders. Ergonomics; Apr 1995.
259. Bjelle, A., Hagberg, M., Michaelson, G. Occupational and individual factors in acute
shoulder-neck disorders among industrial workers. Br J Ind Med; Nov 1981.
260. Blader, S., Barck-Holst, U., Danielsson, S., Ferhm, E., Kalpamaa, M., Leijon, M., Lindh, M.,
Markhede, G. Neck and shoulder complaints among sewing-machine operators: a study
concerning frequency, symptomatology and dysfunction. Appl Ergon; Aug 1991.
261. Brandt, K. E., Mackinnon, S. E. A technique for maximizing biceps recovery in brachial
plexus reconstruction. J Hand Surg Am; Jul 1993.
262. Ekberg, K., Bjorkqvist, B., Malm, P., Bjerre-Kiely, B., Karlsson, M., Axelson, O. Case-control
study of risk factors for disease in the neck and shoulder area. Occup Environ Med; Apr 1994.
263. Eltayeb, S., Staal, J. B., Hassan, A., de Bie, R. A. Work related risk factors for neck, shoulder
and arms complaints: a cohort study among Dutch computer office workers. J Occup Rehabil;
Dec 2009.
264. Feveile, H., Jensen, C., Burr, H. Risk factors for neck-shoulder and wrist-hand symptoms
in a 5-year follow-up study of 3,990 employees in Denmark. Int Arch Occup Environ Health;
Apr 2002.
265. Fredriksson, K., Alfredsson, L., Thorbjornsson, C. B., Punnett, L., Toomingas, A., Torgen,
M., Kilbom, A. Risk factors for neck and shoulder disorders: a nested case-control study
covering a 24-year period. Am J Ind Med; Nov 2000.
266. Ghaffari, M., Alipour, A., Farshad, A. A., Yensen, I., Vingard, E. Incidence and recurrence
of disabling low back pain and neck-shoulder pain. Spine (Phila Pa 1976); Oct 1 2006.
267. Grooten, W. J., Mulder, M., Josephson, M., Alfredsson, L., Wiktorin, C. The influence of
work-related exposures on the prognosis of neck/shoulder pain. Eur Spine J; Dec 2007.
268. Hagberg, M., Wegman, D. H. Prevalence rates and odds ratios of shoulder-neck diseases
in different occupational groups. Br J Ind Med; Sep 1987.
269. Holmstrom, E. B., Lindell, J., Moritz, U. Low back and neck/shoulder pain in construction
workers: occupational workload and psychosocial risk factors. Part 1: Relationship to low back
pain. Spine (Phila Pa 1976); Jun 1992.
270. Hooftman, W. E., van der Beek, A. J., Bongers, P. M., van Mechelen, W. Is there a gender
difference in the effect of work-related physical and psychosocial risk factors on
musculoskeletal symptoms and related sickness absence?. Scand J Work Environ Health; Mar
2009.
271. Hunting, W., Laubli, T., Grandjean, E. Postural and visual loads at VDT workplaces. I.
Constrained postures. Ergonomics; Dec 1981.
272. Kilbom, A., Persson, J. Work technique and its consequences for musculoskeletal
disorders. Ergonomics; Feb 1987.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

704

273. Lapointe, J., Dionne, C. E., Brisson, C., Montreuil, S. Interaction between postural risk
factors and job strain on self-reported musculoskeletal symptoms among users of video
display units: a three-year prospective study. Scand J Work Environ Health; Mar 2009.
274. Linton, S. J., Kamwendo, K. Risk factors in the psychosocial work environment for neck
and shoulder pain in secretaries. J Occup Med; Jul 1989.
275. Nyman, T., Mulder, M., Iliadou, A., Svartengren, M., Wiktorin, C. Physical workload, low
back pain and neck-shoulder pain: a Swedish twin study. Occup Environ Med; Jun 2009.
276. Ohlsson, K., Attewell, R. G., Palsson, B., Karlsson, B., Balogh, I., Johnsson, B., Ahlm, A.,
Skerfving, S. Repetitive industrial work and neck and upper limb disorders in females. Am J
Ind Med; May 1995.
277. Punnett, L., Fine, L. J., Keyserling, W. M., Herrin, G. D., Chaffin, D. B. Back disorders and
nonneutral trunk postures of automobile assembly workers. Scand J Work Environ Health; Oct
1991.
278. Sadeghi-Azandaryani, M., Burklein, D., Ozimek, A., Geiger, C., Mendl, N., Steckmeier, B.,
Heyn, J. Thoracic outlet syndrome: do we have clinical tests as predictors for the outcome
after surgery?. Eur J Med Res; Sep 28 2009.
279. Tola, S., Riihimaki, H., Videman, T., Viikari-Juntura, E., Hanninen, K. Neck and shoulder
symptoms among men in machine operating, dynamic physical work and sedentary work.
Scand J Work Environ Health; Oct 1988.
280. Tornqvist, E. W., Hagberg, M., Hagman, M., Risberg, E. H., Toomingas, A. The influence
of working conditions and individual factors on the incidence of neck and upper limb
symptoms among professional computer users. Int Arch Occup Environ Health; May 2009.
281. van den Heuvel, S. G., van der Beek, A. J., Blatter, B. M., Bongers, P. M. Do work-related
physical factors predict neck and upper limb symptoms in office workers?. Int Arch Occup
Environ Health; Aug 2006.
282. Vihma, T., Nurminen, M., Mutanen, P. Sewing-machine operators&#x27; work and
musculo-skeletal complaints. Ergonomics; Apr 1982.
283. Charles, L. E., Ma, C. C., Burchfiel, C. M., Dong, R. G. Vibration and Ergonomic Exposures
Associated With Musculoskeletal Disorders of the Shoulder and Neck. Saf Health Work; Jun
2018.
284. Mather, L., Ropponen, A., Mittendorfer-Rutz, E., Narusyte, J., Svedberg, P. Health, work
and demographic factors associated with a lower risk of work disability and unemployment
in employees with lower back, neck and shoulder pain. BMC Musculoskelet Disord; Dec 26
2019.
285. Nordander, C., Hansson, G. A., Ohlsson, K., Arvidsson, I., Balogh, I., Stromberg, U., Rittner,
R., Skerfving, S. Exposure-response relationships for work-related neck and shoulder
musculoskeletal disorders--Analyses of pooled uniform data sets. Appl Ergon; Jul 2016.
286. Seidler, A., Romero Starke, K., Freiberg, A., Hegewald, J., Nienhaus, A., Bolm-Audorff, U.
Dose-Response Relationship between Physical Workload and Specific Shoulder Diseases-A
Systematic Review with Meta-Analysis. Int J Environ Res Public Health; Feb 14 2020.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

705

287. Posch, M., Schranz, A., Lener, M., Senn, W., Ang, B. O., Burtscher, M., Ruedl, G.
Prevalence and potential risk factors of flight-related neck, shoulder and low back pain among
helicopter pilots and crewmembers: a questionnaire-based study. BMC Musculoskelet Disord;
Jan 29 2019.
288. van der Molen, H. F., Foresti, C., Daams, J. G., Frings-Dresen, M. H. W., Kuijer, Ppfm.
Work-related risk factors for specific shoulder disorders: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Occup Environ Med; Oct 2017.
289. Andersen, L. L., Fallentin, N., Thorsen, S. V., Holtermann, A. Physical workload and risk of
long-term sickness absence in the general working population and among blue-collar
workers: prospective cohort study with register follow-up. Occup Environ Med; Apr 2016.
290. Miranda, H., Punnett, L., Viikari-Juntura, E., Heliovaara, M., Knekt, P. Physical work and
chronic shoulder disorder. Results of a prospective population-based study. Ann Rheum Dis;
Feb 2008.
291. Bodin, Julie, Garlantézec, Ronan, Costet, Nathalie, Descatha, Alexis, Fouquet, Natacha,
Caroly, Sandrine, Roquelaure, Yves. Forms of work organization and associations with
shoulder disorders: results from a French working population. Applied ergonomics; 2017.
292. Bernard, BP (Ed.). Musculoskeletal Disorders and Workplace Factors. A Critical Review of
Epidemiologic Evidence for Work-Related Musculoskeletal Disorders of the Neck, Upper
Extremity, and Low Back. 1997.
293. Kuorinka, I, Forcier, L. Work-related Musculoskeletal Disorders (WMSDs): A Reference
Book for Prevention. 1995.
294. Welch, L. S., Hunting, K. L., Kellogg, J. Work-related musculoskeletal symptoms among
sheet metal workers. Am J Ind Med; Jun 1995.
295. Kamwendo, K., Linton, S. J., Moritz, U. Neck and shoulder disorders in medical
secretaries. Part II. Ergonomical work environment and symptom profile. Scand J Rehabil
Med; 1991.
296. Trinkoff, A. M., Lipscomb, J. A., Geiger-Brown, J., Brady, B. Musculoskeletal problems of
the neck, shoulder, and back and functional consequences in nurses. Am J Ind Med; Mar 2002.
297. Roquelaure, Yves, Mariel, J, Fanello, S, Boissiere, JC, Chiron, H, Dano, C, Bureau, D,
Penneau-Fontbonne, D. Active epidemiological surveillance of musculoskeletal disorders in a
shoe factory. Occupational and Environmental Medicine; 2002.
298. Frost, P. and J. H. Andersen. Shoulder impingement syndrome in relation to shoulder
intensive work. Occup Environ Med; 1999.
299. Moore, J. S., Garg, A. The Strain Index: a proposed method to analyze jobs for risk of
distal upper extremity disorders. Am Ind Hyg Assoc J; May 1995.
300. Moore, J. S., Rucker, N. P., Knox, K. Validity of generic risk factors and the strain index for
predicting nontraumatic distal upper extremity morbidity. Aihaj; Mar-Apr 2001.
301. Knox, K., Moore, J. S. Predictive validity of the Strain Index in turkey processing. J Occup
Environ Med; May 2001.
302. Hegmann, K.,et al. The Strain Index and Risk for Shoulder Disorders, Proceedings of the
XVth Triennial Congress of the International Ergonomics Association. 2006.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

706

303. Silverstein, B., Fan, Z. J., Smith, C. K., Bao, S., Howard, N., Spielholz, P., Bonauto, D.,
Viikari-Juntura, E. Gender adjustment or stratification in discerning upper extremity
musculoskeletal disorder risk?. Scand J Work Environ Health; Mar 2009.
304. Garg, A.,et al. The effect of maximum voluntary contraction on endurance times for the
shoulder girdle. Int J Ind Ergonomics; 2002.
305. Garg, A.,K. Hegmann,and J. Kapellusch. Maximum one-handed shoulder strength for
overhead work as a function of shoulder posture in females. Occup Ergonomics; 2005.
306. Garg, A.,K. Hegmann,and J. Kapellusch. Short-cycle overhead work and shoulder girdle
muscle fatigue. Intl J Industrial Ergonomics; 2006.
307. Van Rijn, Rogier M, Huisstede, Bionka MA, Koes, Bart W, Burdorf, Alex. Associations
between work-related factors and specific disorders of the shoulder—a systematic review of
the literature. Scandinavian journal of work, environment &amp; health; 2010.
308. Herberts, P., Kadefors, R., Andersson, G., Petersen, I. Shoulder pain in industry: an
epidemiological study on welders. Acta Orthop Scand; Jun 1981.
309. Herberts, P., Kadefors, R., Hogfors, C., Sigholm, G. Shoulder pain and heavy manual labor.
Clin Orthop Relat Res; Dec 1984.
310. Herberts, P. and R. Kadefors. A study of painful shoulder in welders. Acta Orthop Scand;
1976.
311. Bjelle, A.., Hagberg, M.., Michaelsson, G, . Clinical and ergonomic factors in prolonged
shoulder pain among industrial workers. Scand J work and Health; 1979.
312. Silverstein, BA. The prevalence of upper extremity cumulative trauma disorders in
industry [Dissertation]. 1985.
313. Baron, S. Hazard evaluation and technical assistance report: Shoprite Supermarkets, New
Jersey - New York. 1991.
314. Kaerlev, L., Jensen, A., Nielsen, P. S., Olsen, J., Hannerz, H., Tuchsen, F. Hospital contacts
for injuries and musculoskeletal diseases among seamen and fishermen: a population-based
cohort study. BMC Musculoskelet Disord; 2008.
315. Frost, P., Bonde, J. P., Mikkelsen, S., Andersen, J. H., Fallentin, N., Kaergaard, A.,
Thomsen, J. F. Risk of shoulder tendinitis in relation to shoulder loads in monotonous
repetitive work. Am J Ind Med; Jan 2002.
316. Zakaria, D. Rates of carpal tunnel syndrome, epicondylitis, and rotator cuff claims in
Ontario workers during 1997. Chronic Dis Can; Spring 2004.
317. Svendsen, Susanne Wulff, Dalbøge, Annett, Andersen, Johan Hviid, Thomsen, Jane
Frølund, Frost, Poul. Risk of surgery for subacromial impingement syndrome in relation to
neck-shoulder complaints and occupational biomechanical exposures: a longitudinal study.
Scandinavian journal of work, environment &amp; health; 2013.
318. Descatha, A., Roquelaure, Y., Chastang, J. F., Evanoff, B., Cyr, D., Leclerc, A. Description
of outcomes of upper-extremity musculoskeletal disorders in workers highly exposed to
repetitive work. J Hand Surg Am; May-Jun 2009.
319. Shaikh, Afroz Z, Bhise, Swati A, Parab, Shilpa A. Prevalence of shoulder pain in petrol
pump workers. Journal of Applied and Advanced Research; 2017.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

707

320. Melchior, M., Roquelaure, Y., Evanoff, B., Chastang, J. F., Ha, C., Imbernon, E., Goldberg,
M., Leclerc, A. Why are manual workers at high risk of upper limb disorders? The role of
physical work factors in a random sample of workers in France (the Pays de la Loire study).
Occup Environ Med; Nov 2006.
321. Roquelaure, Yves, Bodin, Julie, Ha, Catherine, Le Manac'h, Audrey Petit, Descatha, Alexis,
Chastang, Jean-François, Leclerc, Annette, Goldberg, Marcel, Imbernon, Ellen. Personal,
biomechanical, and psychosocial risk factors for rotator cuff syndrome in a working
population. Scandinavian journal of work, environment &amp; health; 2011.
322. Luopajarvi, T., Kuorinka, I., Virolainen, M., Holmberg, M. Prevalence of tenosynovitis and
other injuries of the upper extremities in repetitive work. Scand J Work Environ Health; 1979.
323. McCormack, R. R.,Jr., Inman, R. D., Wells, A., Berntsen, C., Imbus, H. R. Prevalence of
tendinitis and related disorders of the upper extremity in a manufacturing workforce. J
Rheumatol; Jul 1990.
324. Bergenudd, H., Lindgarde, F., Nilsson, B., Petersson, C. J. Shoulder pain in middle age. A
study of prevalence and relation to occupational work load and psychosocial factors. Clin
Orthop Relat Res; Jun 1988.
325. Kukkonen, R. Prevention of fatigue amongst data entry operators. Ergonomics of
Workstation Design; 1983.
326. Thygesen, L. C., Mikkelsen, S., Pedersen, E. B., Moller, K. L., Alkjaer, T., Koblauch, H.,
Simonsen, E. B., Moller, S. P., Brauer, C. Subacromial shoulder disorders among baggage
handlers: an observational cohort study. Int Arch Occup Environ Health; Jul 2016.
327. Hanvold, T. N., Waersted, M., Mengshoel, A. M., Bjertness, E., Veiersted, K. B. Work with
prolonged arm elevation as a risk factor for shoulder pain: a longitudinal study among young
adults. Appl Ergon; Mar 2015.
328. van Eijsden-Besseling, M. D., van den Bergh, K. A., Staal, J. B., de Bie, R. A., van den
Heuvel, W. J. The course of nonspecific work-related upper limb disorders and the influence
of demographic factors, psychologic factors, and physical fitness on clinical status and
disability. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Jun 2010.
329. Macfarlane, G. J., Norrie, G., Atherton, K., Power, C., Jones, G. T. The influence of
socioeconomic status on the reporting of regional and widespread musculoskeletal pain:
results from the 1958 British Birth Cohort Study. Ann Rheum Dis; Oct 2009.
330. Bodin, Julie, Garlantézec, Ronan, Costet, Nathalie, Descatha, Alexis, Viel, Jean-François,
Roquelaure, Yves. Shoulder pain among male industrial workers: Validation of a conceptual
model in two independent French working populations. Applied Ergonomics; 2020.
331. Vargas-Prada, S. and D. Coggon. Psychological and psychosocial determinants of
musculoskeletal pain and associated disability. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol; 2015.
332. Sadeghian, F., Raei, M., Amiri, M. Persistent of Neck/Shoulder Pain among Computer
Office Workers with Specific Attention to Pain Expectation, Somatization Tendency, and
Beliefs. Int J Prev Med; Sep 2014.
333. Johansson, J. A., Rubenowitz, S. Risk indicators in the psychosocial and physical work
environment for work-related neck, shoulder and low back symptoms: a study among blueand white-collar workers in eight companies. Scand J Rehabil Med; Sep 1994.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

708

334. van den Heuvel, S. G., Heinrich, J., Jans, M. P., van der Beek, A. J., Bongers, P. M. The
effect of physical activity in leisure time on neck and upper limb symptoms. Prev Med; Jul
2005.
335. Manninen, P., Heliovaara, M., Riihimaki, H., Makela, P. Does psychological distress
predict disability?. Int J Epidemiol; Oct 1997.
336. Potter, M. Q., Wylie, J. D., Greis, P. E., Burks, R. T., Tashjian, R. Z. Psychological distress
negatively affects self-assessment of shoulder function in patients with rotator cuff tears. Clin
Orthop Relat Res; Dec 2014.
337. Menendez, M. E., Baker, D. K., Oladeji, L. O., Fryberger, C. T., McGwin, G., Ponce, B. A.
Psychological Distress Is Associated with Greater Perceived Disability and Pain in Patients
Presenting to a Shoulder Clinic. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Dec 16 2015.
338. Leroyer, A., Edme, J. L., Vaxevanoglou, X., Buisset, C., Laurent, P., Desobry, P., Frimat, P.
Neck, shoulder, and hand and wrist pain among administrative employees: relation to worktime organization and psychosocial factors at work. J Occup Environ Med; Mar 2006.
339. Roquelaure, Y., Ha, C., Rouillon, C., Fouquet, N., Leclerc, A., Descatha, A., Touranchet, A.,
Goldberg, M., Imbernon, E. Risk factors for upper-extremity musculoskeletal disorders in the
working population. Arthritis Rheum; Oct 15 2009.
340. Bodin, Julie, Ha, Catherine, Chastang, Jean‐François, Descatha, Alexis, Leclerc, Annette,
Goldberg, Marcel, Imbernon, Ellen, Roquelaure, Yves. Comparison of risk factors for shoulder
pain and rotator cuff syndrome in the working population. American journal of industrial
medicine; 2012.
341. Grooten, Wilhelmus Johannes Andreas, Mulder, Marie, Josephson, Malin, Alfredsson,
Lars, Wiktorin, Christina. The influence of work-related exposures on the prognosis of
neck/shoulder pain. European spine journal; 2007.
342. Harkness, E. F., Macfarlane, G. J., Nahit, E., Silman, A. J., McBeth, J. Mechanical injury
and psychosocial factors in the work place predict the onset of widespread body pain: a twoyear prospective study among cohorts of newly employed workers. Arthritis Rheum; May
2004.
343. Andersen, J. H., Haahr, J. P., Frost, P. Risk factors for more severe regional
musculoskeletal symptoms: a two-year prospective study of a general working population.
Arthritis Rheum; Apr 2007.
344. Halonen, J. I., Lallukka, T., Virtanen, M., Rod, N. H., Magnusson Hanson, L. L. Bi-directional
relation between effortreward imbalance and risk of neck-shoulder pain: assessment of
mediation through depressive symptoms using occupational longitudinal data. Scand J Work
Environ Health; Mar 1 2019.
345. Mantyselka, P., Lupsakko, T., Kautiainen, H., Vanhala, M. Neck-shoulder pain and
depressive symptoms: a cohort study with a 7-year follow-up. Eur J Pain; Feb 2010.
346. Carbonel, I., Martinez, A. A., Calvo, A., Ripalda, J., Herrera, A. Single-row versus doublerow arthroscopic repair in the treatment of rotator cuff tears: a prospective randomized
clinical study. Int Orthop; Sep 2012.
347. Myers, D., Silverstein, B., Nelson, N. A. Predictors of shoulder and back injuries in nursing
home workers: a prospective study. Am J Ind Med; Jun 2002.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

709

348. Bodin, J., Garlantezec, R., Costet, N., Descatha, A., Viel, J. F., Roquelaure, Y. Risk Factors
for Shoulder Pain in a Cohort of French Workers: A Structural Equation Model. Am J Epidemiol;
Feb 1 2018.
349. Borg, K., Hensing, G., Alexanderson, K. Predictive factors for disability pension--an 11year follow up of young persons on sick leave due to neck, shoulder, or back diagnoses. Scand
J Public Health; Jun 2001.
350. Hamberg-van Reenen, H. H., Ariens, G. A., Blatter, B. M., van Mechelen, W., Bongers, P.
M. A systematic review of the relation between physical capacity and future low back and
neck/shoulder pain. Pain; Jul 2007.
351. Karpansalo, M., Manninen, P., Lakka, T. A., Kauhanen, J., Rauramaa, R., Salonen, J. T.
Physical workload and risk of early retirement: prospective population-based study among
middle-aged men. J Occup Environ Med; Oct 2002.
352. Sakai, H., Fujita, K., Sakai, Y., Mizuno, K. Immunolocalization of cytokines and growth
factors in subacromial bursa of rotator cuff tear patients. Kobe J Med Sci; Feb 2001.
353. Gotoh, M., Hamada, K., Yamakawa, H., Yanagisawa, K., Nakamura, M., Yamazaki, H.,
Inoue, A., Fukuda, H. Interleukin-1-induced glenohumeral synovitis and shoulder pain in
rotator cuff diseases. J Orthop Res; Nov 2002.
354. Voloshin, I., Gelinas, J., Maloney, M. D., O'Keefe, R. J., Bigliani, L. U., Blaine, T. A.
Proinflammatory cytokines and metalloproteases are expressed in the subacromial bursa in
patients with rotator cuff disease. Arthroscopy; Sep 2005.
355. Nakama, K., Gotoh, M., Yamada, T., Mitsui, Y., Yasukawa, H., Imaizumi, T., Higuchi, F.,
Nagata, K. Interleukin-6-induced activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription3 in ruptured rotator cuff tendon. J Int Med Res; Nov-Dec 2006.
356. Okamura, K., Kobayashi, T., Yamamoto, A., Shitara, H., Osawa, T., Ichinose, T., Takagishi,
K. Shoulder pain and intra-articular interleukin-8 levels in patients with rotator cuff tears. Int
J Rheum Dis; Feb 2017.
357. Bedi, A., Maak, T., Walsh, C., Rodeo, S. A., Grande, D., Dines, D. M., Dines, J. S. Cytokines
in rotator cuff degeneration and repair. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Feb 2012.
358. Santavirta, S., Konttinen, Y. T., Antti-Poika, I., Nordstrom, D. Inflammation of the
subacromial bursa in chronic shoulder pain. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg; 1992.
359. Hyvonen, P., Melkko, J., Lehto, V. P., Jalovaara, P. Involvement of the subacromial bursa
in impingement syndrome of the shoulder as judged by expression of tenascin-C and
histopathology. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Mar 2003.
360. Gotoh, M., Hamada, K., Yamakawa, H., Inoue, A., Fukuda, H. Increased substance P in
subacromial bursa and shoulder pain in rotator cuff diseases. J Orthop Res; Sep 1998.
361. Yanagisawa, K., Hamada, K., Gotoh, M., TokunagaT., Oshika, Y., Tomisawa, M., Lee, Y. H.,
Handa, A., Kijima, H., Yamazaki, H., Nakamura, M., Ueyama, Y., Tamaoki, N., Fukuda, H.
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression in the subacromial bursa is increased in
patients with impingement syndrome. J Orthop Res; May 2001.
362. Carp, S. J., Barbe, M. F., Winter, K. A., Amin, M., Barr, A. E. Inflammatory biomarkers
increase with severity of upper-extremity overuse disorders. Clin Sci (Lond); Mar 2007.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

710

363. Franceschi, F., Papalia, R., Paciotti, M., Franceschetti, E., Di Martino, A., Maffulli, N.,
Denaro, V. Obesity as a risk factor for tendinopathy: a systematic review. Int J Endocrinol;
2014.
364. Rechardt, M., Shiri, R., Karppinen, J., Jula, A., Heliovaara, M., Viikari-Juntura, E. Lifestyle
and metabolic factors in relation to shoulder pain and rotator cuff tendinitis: a populationbased study. BMC Musculoskelet Disord; Jul 20 2010.
365. Baumgarten, K. M., Gerlach, D., Galatz, L. M., Teefey, S. A., Middleton, W. D., Ditsios, K.,
Yamaguchi, K. Cigarette smoking increases the risk for rotator cuff tears. Clin Orthop Relat
Res; Jun 2010.
366. Leino-Arjas, P. Smoking and musculoskeletal disorders in the metal industry: a
prospective study. Occup Environ Med; Dec 1998.
367. Maher, A., Leigh, W., Brick, M., Young, S., Millar, J., Walker, C., Caughey, M. Gender,
ethnicity and smoking affect pain and function in patients with rotator cuff tears. ANZ J Surg;
Sep 2017.
368. Bishop, J. Y., Santiago-Torres, J. E., Rimmke, N., Flanigan, D. C. Smoking Predisposes to
Rotator Cuff Pathology and Shoulder Dysfunction: A Systematic Review. Arthroscopy; Aug
2015.
369. Abboud, J. A., Kim, J. S. The effect of hypercholesterolemia on rotator cuff disease. Clin
Orthop Relat Res; Jun 2010.
370. Lin, Tony Tung-Liang, Lin, Ching-Heng, Chang, Chia-Li, Chi, Chun-Han, Chang, Shin-Tsu,
Sheu, Wayne Huey-Herng. The effect of diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and statins on the
development of rotator cuff disease: a nationwide, 11-year, longitudinal, population-based
follow-up study. The American journal of sports medicine; 2015.
371. MacDonald, Austin E, Ekhtiari, Seper, Khan, Moin, Moro, Jaydeep K, Bedi, Asheesh,
Miller, Bruce S. Dyslipidaemia is associated with an increased risk of rotator cuff disease: a
systematic review. Journal of ISAKOS: Joint Disorders &amp; Orthopaedic Sports Medicine;
2017.
372. Kim, Jae-Min, Kim, Min-Wook, Do, Hyun-Jung. Influence of hyperlipidemia on the
treatment of supraspinatus tendinopathy with or without tear. Annals of rehabilitation
medicine; 2016.
373. Yang, Yang, Qu, Jin. The effects of hyperlipidemia on rotator cuff diseases: a systematic
review. Journal of orthopaedic surgery and research; 2018.
374. Leong, Hio Teng, Chuen Fu, Sai, He, Xin, Han Oh, Joo, Yamamoto, Nobuyuki, Yung, Shu
Hang Patrick. Risk factors for rotator cuff tendinopathy: A systematic review and metaanalysis. Journal of rehabilitation medicine; 2019.
375. Cole, A.,et al. Is diabetes associated with shoulder pain or stiffness? Results from a
population based study. J Rheumatol; 2009.
376. Titchener, A. G., White, J. J., Hinchliffe, S. R., Tambe, A. A., Hubbard, R. B., Clark, D. I.
Comorbidities in rotator cuff disease: a case-control study. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Sep 2014.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

711

377. Nyman, Teresia, Mulder, Marie, Iliadou, Anastasia, Svartengren, Magnus, Wiktorin,
Christina. Physical workload, low back pain and neck–shoulder pain: a Swedish twin study.
Occupational and environmental medicine; 2009.
378. Tashjian, R. Z., Farnham, J. M., Albright, F. S., Teerlink, C. C., Cannon-Albright, L. A.
Evidence for an inherited predisposition contributing to the risk for rotator cuff disease. J
Bone Joint Surg Am; May 2009.
379. Dabija, Dominique I, Gao, Chan, Edwards, Todd L, Kuhn, John E, Jain, Nitin B. Genetic and
familial predisposition to rotator cuff disease: a systematic review. Journal of shoulder and
elbow surgery; 2017.
380. Djerbi, I., Chammas, M., Mirous, M. P., Lazerges, C., Coulet, B. Impact of cardiovascular
risk factor on the prevalence and severity of symptomatic full-thickness rotator cuff tears.
Orthop Traumatol Surg Res; Oct 2015.
381. Sayampanathan, A. A., Andrew, T. H. Systematic review on risk factors of rotator cuff
tears. J Orthop Surg (Hong Kong); Jan 2017.
382. Abate, M., Di Carlo, L., Salini, V., Schiavone, C. Risk factors associated to bilateral rotator
cuff tears. Orthop Traumatol Surg Res; Oct 2017.
383. Park, H. B., Gwark, J. Y., Im, J. H., Jung, J., Na, J. B., Yoon, C. H. Factors Associated with
Atraumatic Posterosuperior Rotator Cuff Tears. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Aug 15 2018.
384. Yamamoto, Nobuyuki, Mineta, Mitsuyoshi, Kawakami, Jun, Sano, Hirotaka, Itoi, Eiji. Risk
factors for tear progression in symptomatic rotator cuff tears: a prospective study of 174
shoulders. The American journal of sports medicine; 2017.
385. Beall, D. P., Williamson, E. E., Ly, J. Q., Adkins, M. C., Emery, R. L., Jones, T. P., Rowland,
C. M. Association of biceps tendon tears with rotator cuff abnormalities: degree of correlation
with tears of the anterior and superior portions of the rotator cuff. AJR Am J Roentgenol; Mar
2003.
386. Redondo-Alonso, Lucía, Chamorro-Moriana, Gema, Jiménez-Rejano, José Jesús, LópezTarrida, Patricio, Ridao-Fernández, Carmen. Relationship between chronic pathologies of the
supraspinatus tendon and the long head of the biceps tendon: systematic review. BMC
musculoskeletal disorders; 2014.
387. Gill, T. J., McIrvin, E., Kocher, M. S., Homa, K., Mair, S. D., Hawkins, R. J. The relative
importance of acromial morphology and age with respect to rotator cuff pathology. J Shoulder
Elbow Surg; Jul-Aug 2002.
388. Lee, M., Chen, J. Y., Liow, M. H. L., Chong, H. C., Chang, P., Lie, D. Critical Shoulder Angle
and Acromial Index Do Not Influence 24-Month Functional Outcome After Arthroscopic
Rotator Cuff Repair. Am J Sports Med; Nov 2017.
389. Morelli, K. M., Martin, B. R., Charakla, F. H., Durmisevic, A., Warren, G. L. Acromion
morphology and prevalence of rotator cuff tear: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin
Anat; Jan 2019.
390. Ogawa, K., Yoshida, A., Inokuchi, W., Naniwa, T. Acromial spur: relationship to aging and
morphologic changes in the rotator cuff. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Nov-Dec 2005.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

712

391. Lambert, R. G., Dhillon, S. S., Jhangri, G. S., Sacks, J., Sacks, H., Wong, B., Russell, A. S.,
Maksymowych, W. P. High prevalence of symptomatic enthesopathy of the shoulder in
ankylosing spondylitis: deltoid origin involvement constitutes a hallmark of disease. Arthritis
Rheum; Oct 15 2004.
392. Kennedy, P., Joshi, R., Dhawan, A. The Effect of Psychosocial Factors on Outcomes in
Patients With Rotator Cuff Tears: A Systematic Review. Arthroscopy; Sep 2019.
393. Jay, K., Thorsen, S. V., Sundstrup, E., Aiguade, R., Casana, J., Calatayud, J., Andersen, L. L.
Fear Avoidance Beliefs and Risk of Long-Term Sickness Absence: Prospective Cohort Study
among Workers with Musculoskeletal Pain. Pain Res Treat; 2018.
394. Aili, K., Nyman, T., Hillert, L., Svartengren, M. Sleep disturbances predict future sickness
absence among individuals with lower back or neck-shoulder pain: a 5-year prospective study.
Scand J Public Health; May 2015.
395. Rasmussen-Barr, E., Grooten, W. J., Hallqvist, J., Holm, L. W., Skillgate, E. Are job strain
and sleep disturbances prognostic factors for neck/shoulder/arm pain? A cohort study of a
general population of working age in Sweden. BMJ Open; Jul 8 2014.
396. Stuart, M. J., Smith, A. Injuries in Junior A ice hockey. A three-year prospective study. Am
J Sports Med; Jul-Aug 1995.
397. Dohjima, T., Sumi, Y., Ohno, T., Sumi, H., Shimizu, K. The dangers of snowboarding: a 9year prospective comparison of snowboarding and skiing injuries. Acta Orthop Scand; Dec
2001.
398. Webb, J., Bannister, G. Acromioclavicular disruption in first class rugby players. Br J Sports
Med; Dec 1992.
399. Nordqvist, A., Petersson, C. J. Incidence and causes of shoulder girdle injuries in an urban
population. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Mar-Apr 1995.
400. Laprade, R. F., Surowiec, R. K., Sochanska, A. N., Hentkowski, B. S., Martin, B. M.,
Engebretsen, L., Wijdicks, C. A. Epidemiology, identification, treatment and return to play of
musculoskeletal-based ice hockey injuries. Br J Sports Med; Jan 2014.
401. Hibberd, E. E., Kerr, Z. Y., Roos, K. G., Djoko, A., Dompier, T. P. Epidemiology of
Acromioclavicular Joint Sprains in 25 National Collegiate Athletic Association Sports: 20092010 to 2014-2015 Academic Years. Am J Sports Med; Oct 2016.
402. Melvin, P. R., Souza, S., Mead, R. N., Smith, C., Mulcahey, M. K. Epidemiology of Upper
Extremity Injuries in NCAA Men&#x27;s and Women&#x27;s Ice Hockey. Am J Sports Med;
Aug 2018.
403. Frey, A., Lambert, C., Vesselle, B., Rousseau, R., Dor, F., Marquet, L. A., Toussaint, J. F.,
Crema, M. D. Epidemiology of Judo-Related Injuries in 21 Seasons of Competitions in France:
A Prospective Study of Relevant Traumatic Injuries. Orthop J Sports Med; May 2019.
404. Montgomery, C., O'Briain, D. E., Hurley, E. T., Pauzenberger, L., Mullett, H., Moran, C. J.
Video Analysis of Shoulder Dislocations in Rugby: Insights Into the Dislocating Mechanisms.
Am J Sports Med; Dec 2019.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

713

405. Goodman, A. D., Twomey-Kozak, J., DeFroda, S. F., Owens, B. D. Epidemiology of shoulder
and elbow injuries in National Collegiate Athletic Association wrestlers, 2009-2010 through
2013-2014. Phys Sportsmed; Sep 2018.
406. Goodman, A. D.,et al. Season-Ending Shoulder Injuries in the National Collegiate Athletic
Association: Data From the NCAA Injury Surveillance Program, 2009-2010 Through 20132014. Am J Sports Med; 2018.
407. Goodman, A. D., Raducha, J. E., DeFroda, S. F., Gil, J. A., Owens, B. D. Shoulder and elbow
injuries in NCAA football players, 2009-2010 through 2013-2014. Phys Sportsmed; Sep 2019.
408. Petersson, C. J. Degeneration of the acromioclavicular joint. A morphological study. Acta
Orthop Scand; Jun 1983.
409. Valdes, A. M., Loughlin, J., Oene, M. V., Chapman, K., Surdulescu, G. L., Doherty, M.,
Spector, T. D. Sex and ethnic differences in the association of ASPN, CALM1, COL2A1, COMP,
and FRZB with genetic susceptibility to osteoarthritis of the knee. Arthritis Rheum; Jan 2007.
410. Valdes, A. M., Spector, T. D. Genetic epidemiology of hip and knee osteoarthritis. Nat
Rev Rheumatol; Jan 2011.
411. Zhang, Yuqing, Jordan, Joanne M. Epidemiology of osteoarthritis. Clinics in geriatric
medicine; 2010.
412. Kellgren, JH. Primary generalised osteoarthritis. Bulletin on the rheumatic diseases; 1954.
413. Kellgren, JH. Osteoarthrosis in patients and populations. British Medical Journal; 1961.
414. Kellgren, JH, Lawrence, JS. Osteo-arthrosis and disk degeneration in an urban population.
Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases; 1958.
415. Kellgren, JH, Lawrence, JS, Bier, Frida. Genetic factors in generalized osteo-arthrosis.
Annals of the rheumatic diseases; 1963.
416. Kellgren, JH, Moore, R. Generalized osteoarthritis and Heberden&#x27;s nodes. British
medical journal; 1952.
417. Meachim, G., Whitehouse, G. H., Pedley, R. B., Nichol, F. E., Owen, R. An investigation of
radiological, clinical and pathological correlations in osteoarthrosis of the hip. Clin Radiol; Sep
1980.
418. Nakagawa, Yasuaki, Hyakuna, Katsufumi, Otani, Shigeru, Hashitani, Minoru, Nakamura,
Takashi. Epidemiologic study of glenohumeral osteoarthritis with plain radiography. Journal
of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery; 1999/11/01/.
419. Mahakkanukrauh, P., Surin, P. Prevalence of osteophytes associated with the acromion
and acromioclavicular joint. Clin Anat; Nov 2003.
420. Lehtinen, J. T., Kaarela, K., Belt, E. A., Kautiainen, H. J., Kauppi, M. J., Lehto, M. U.
Incidence of acromioclavicular joint involvement in rheumatoid arthritis: a 15 year endpoint
study. J Rheumatol; Jun 1999.
421. Felson, D. T., Anderson, J. J., Naimark, A., Walker, A. M., Meenan, R. F. Obesity and knee
osteoarthritis. The Framingham Study. Ann Intern Med; Jul 1 1988.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

714

422. Oliveria, S. A., Felson, D. T., Cirillo, P. A., Reed, J. I., Walker, A. M. Body weight, body mass
index, and incident symptomatic osteoarthritis of the hand, hip, and knee. Epidemiology; Mar
1999.
423. Krøner, K., Lind, T., Jensen, J. The epidemiology of shoulder dislocations. Arch Orthop
Trauma Surg; 1989.
424. Stenlund, B., Goldie, I., Hagberg, M., Hogstedt, C., Marions, O. Radiographic
osteoarthrosis in the acromioclavicular joint resulting from manual work or exposure to
vibration. Br J Ind Med; Aug 1992.
425. Raynor, M. B., Kuhn, J. E. Utility of features of the patient&amp;#x27;s history in the
diagnosis of atraumatic shoulder pain: a systematic review. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; 2016.
426. Tzeng, C. Y., Chiang, H. Y., Huang, C. C., Lin, W. S., Hsiao, T. H., Lin, C. H. The impact of
pre-existing shoulder diseases and traumatic injuries of the shoulder on adhesive capsulitis in
adult population: A population-based nested case-control study. Medicine (Baltimore); Sep
2019.
427. White, D.,et al. Secular trend of adhesive capsulitis. Arthritis Care Res; 2011.
428. Kingston, K., Curry, E. J., Galvin, J. W., Li, X. Shoulder adhesive capsulitis: epidemiology
and predictors of surgery. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Aug 2018.
429. Wang, K.,et al. Risk factors in idiopathic adhesive capsulitis: a case control study. J
Shoulder Elbow Surg; 2013.
430. Hsu, K. C., Sun, C. H., Wu, Y. Y., Chen, L. C., Wu, Y. T., Chien, W. C. Increased risk of
adhesive capsulitis among patients with gout: A nationwide population-based matchedcohort study. Int J Rheum Dis; Sep 2018.
431. Park, H. B., Gwark, J. Y., Jung, J., Jeong, S. T. Association Between High-Sensitivity CReactive Protein and Idiopathic Adhesive Capsulitis. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Feb 20 2020.
432. Rai, S. K., Kashid, M., Chakrabarty, B., Upreti, V., Shaki, O. Is it necessary to screen patient
with adhesive capsulitis of shoulder for diabetes mellitus?. J Family Med Prim Care; Sep 2019.
433. Balci, N., Balci, M. K., Tuzuner, S. Shoulder adhesive capsulitis and shoulder range of
motion in type II diabetes mellitus: association with diabetic complications. J Diabetes
Complications; May-Jun 1999.
434. Arkkila, P. E.,et al. Shoulder capsulitis in type I and II diabetic patients: association with
diabetic complications and related diseases. Ann Rheum Dis; 1996.
435. Meixner, C., Loder, R. T. The Demographics of Fractures and Dislocations Across the
Entire United States due to Common Sports and Recreational Activities. Sports Health;
Mar/Apr 2020.
436. Lind, T., Kroner, K., Jensen, J. The epidemiology of fractures of the proximal humerus.
Arch Orthop Trauma Surg; 1989.
437. Hovelius, L, Olofsson, A, Sandstrom, B, Augustini, BG, Krantz, L, Fredin, H, Tillander, B,
Skoglund, U, Salomonsson, B, Nowak, J, Sennerby, U. Nonoperative treatment of primary
anterior shoulder dislocation in patients forty years of age and younger. A prospective twentyfive year follow-up. J Bone Joint Surg Am; 2008.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

715

438. Griffith, JF, Antonio, GE, Yung, PS, Wong, EM, Yu, AB, Ahuja, AT, Chan, KM. Prevalence,
pattern, and spectrum of glenoid bone loss in anterior shoulder dislocation: CT analysis of 218
patients. Am J Roentgenol; 2008.
439. Owens, BD, Duffey, ML, Nelson, BJ, DeBerardino, TM, Taylor, DC, Mountcastle, SB. The
incidence and characteristics of shoulder instability at the United States Military Academy.
Am J Sports Med; 2007.
440. Headey, J, Brooks, JH, Kemp, SP. The epidemiology of shoulder injuries in English
professional rugby union. Am J Sports Med; 2007.
441. Cho, N.,J. Hwang,and Y. Rhee. Arthroscopic stabilization in anterior shoulder instability:
collision athletes versus noncollision athletes. Arthroscopy; 2006.
442. Vermeiren, J, Handelberg, F, Casteleyn, PP, Opdecam, P. The rate of recurrence of
traumatic anterior dislocation of the shoulder. A study of 154 cases and a review of the
literature. Int Orthop; 1993.
443. Leroux, T.,et al. Combined arthroscopic Bankart repair and remplissage for recurrent
shoulder instability. Arthroscopy; 2013.
444. Shields, D. W., Jefferies, J. G., Brooksbank, A. J., Millar, N., Jenkins, P. J. Epidemiology of
glenohumeral dislocation and subsequent instability in an urban population. J Shoulder Elbow
Surg; Feb 2018.
445. Shah, A., Judge, A., Delmestri, A., Edwards, K., Arden, N. K., Prieto-Alhambra, D., Holt, T.
A., Pinedo-Villanueva, R. A., Hopewell, S., Lamb, S. E., Rangan, A., Carr, A. J., Collins, G. S.,
Rees, J. L. Incidence of shoulder dislocations in the UK, 1995-2015: a population-based cohort
study. BMJ Open; Nov 14 2017.
446. Myers, JB, Ju, YY, Hwang, JH, McMahon, PJ, Rodosky, MW, Lephart, SM. Reflexive muscle
activation alterations in shoulders with anterior glenohumeral instability. Am J Sports Med;
2004.
447. Moreau, CE, Moreau, SR. Chiropractic management of a professional hockey player with
recurrent shoulder instability. J Manipulative Physiol Ther; 2001.
448. Wasserstein, D. N., Sheth, U., Colbenson, K., Henry, P. D., Chahal, J., Dwyer, T., Kuhn, J.
E. The True Recurrence Rate and Factors Predicting Recurrent Instability After Nonsurgical
Management of Traumatic Primary Anterior Shoulder Dislocation: A Systematic Review.
Arthroscopy; Dec 2016.
449. Kardouni, J. R., C. J., McKinnon, Seitz, A. L. Incidence of Shoulder Dislocations and the
Rate of Recurrent Instability in Soldiers. Med Sci Sports Exerc; 2016.
450. Kralinger, F. S.,et al. Predicting recurrence after primary anterior shoulder dislocation.
Am J Sports Med; 2002.
451. Longo, U. G.,et al. Management of primary acute anterior shoulder dislocation:
systematic review and quantitative synthesis of the literature. Arthroscopy; 2014.
452. Olds, M., Ellis, R., Donaldson, K., Parmar, P., Kersten, P. Risk factors which predispose
first-time traumatic anterior shoulder dislocations to recurrent instability in adults: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med; Jul 2015.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

716

453. Shibata, Y, Honjo, N, Shinoda, T, Kumano, T, Naito, M. Pressure between the humeral
head and the subscapularis tendon after the modified Boytchev procedure. J Shoulder Elbow
Surg; 2004.
454. Horst, K., Von Harten, R., Weber, C., Andruszkow, H., Pfeifer, R., Dienstknecht, T., Pape,
H. C. Assessment of coincidence and defect sizes in Bankart and Hill-Sachs lesions after
anterior shoulder dislocation: a radiological study. Br J Radiol; Feb 2014.
455. Orvets, N. D., Parisien, R. L., Curry, E. J., Chung, J. S., Eichinger, J. K., Murakami, A. M., Li,
X. Acute Versus Delayed Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Associated Abnormalities in
Traumatic Anterior Shoulder Dislocations. Orthop J Sports Med; Sep 2017.
456. Vahedi, H., Fleischman, A. N., Salvo, J. P.,Jr., Parvizi, J. Higher Prevalence of Concomitant
Shoulder Labral Tears in Patients With Femoroacetabular Impingement. Arthroscopy; Apr
2019.
457. Schwartzberg, R., Reuss, B. L., Burkhart, B. G., Butterfield, M., Wu, J. Y., McLean, K. W.
High Prevalence of Superior Labral Tears Diagnosed by MRI in Middle-Aged Patients With
Asymptomatic Shoulders. Orthop J Sports Med; Jan 2016.
458. Gill, T. K., Shanahan, E. M., Allison, D., Alcorn, D., Hill, C. L. Prevalence of abnormalities
on shoulder MRI in symptomatic and asymptomatic older adults. Int J Rheum Dis; Nov 2014.
459. Mannava, S., Frangiamore, S. J., Murphy, C. P., Sanchez, A., Sanchez, G., Dornan, G. J.,
Bradley, J. P., LaPrade, R. F., Millett, P. J., Provencher, M. T. Prevalence of Shoulder Labral
Injury in Collegiate Football Players at the National Football League Scouting Combine. Orthop
J Sports Med; Jul 2018.
460. Lansdown, D. A.,et al. Imaging-Based Prevalence of Superior Labral Anterior-Posterior
Tears Significantly Increases in the Aging Shoulder. Orthop J Sports; 2018.
461. DePalma, AF, Callery, G, Bennett, GA. Variational anatomy and degenerative lesions of
the shoulder joint. AAOS Instructional Course Lect; 1949.
462. Kuorinka, I., Koskinen, P. Occupational rheumatic diseases and upper limb strain in
manual jobs in a light mechanical industry. Scand J Work Environ Health; 1979.
463. Knave, B. G., Wibom, R. I., Bergqvist, U. O., Carlsson, L. L., Levin, M. I., Nylen, P. R. Work
with video display terminals among office employees. II. Physical exposure factors. Scand J
Work Environ Health; Dec 1985.
464. Yu, ITS, Wong, TW. Musculoskeletal problems among VDU workers in a Hong Kong bank.
Occup Med; 1996.
465. Rudolph, L. NIOSH Research Projects. Musculoskeletal disorders: physicians and the
return-to-work- process. 1997.
466. Velly, A. M., Gornitsky, M., Philippe, P. Contributing factors to chronic myofascial pain: a
case-control study. Pain; Aug 2003.
467. Treaster, D., Marras, W. S., Burr, D., Sheedy, J. E., Hart, D. Myofascial trigger point
development from visual and postural stressors during computer work. J Electromyogr
Kinesiol; Apr 2006.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

717

468. Hoyle, J. A., Marras, W. S., Sheedy, J. E., Hart, D. E. Effects of postural and visual stressors
on myofascial trigger point development and motor unit rotation during computer work. J
Electromyogr Kinesiol; Feb 2011.
469. Do, T. P., Heldarskard, G. F., Kolding, L. T., Hvedstrup, J., Schytz, H. W. Myofascial trigger
points in migraine and tension-type headache. J Headache Pain; Sep 10 2018.
470. Stratton, P., Khachikyan, I., Sinaii, N., Ortiz, R., Shah, J. Association of chronic pelvic pain
and endometriosis with signs of sensitization and myofascial pain. Obstet Gynecol; Mar 2015.
471. Itza, F., Zarza, D., Salinas, J., Teba, F., Ximenez, C. Turn-amplitude analysis as a diagnostic
test for myofascial syndrome in patients with chronic pelvic pain. Pain Res Manag; Mar-Apr
2015.
472. Alonso-Blanco, C., Fernandez-de-Las-Penas, C., de-la-Llave-Rincon, A. I., Zarco-Moreno,
P., Galan-Del-Rio, F., Svensson, P. Characteristics of referred muscle pain to the head from
active trigger points in women with myofascial temporomandibular pain and fibromyalgia
syndrome. J Headache Pain; Nov 2012.
473. Gane, E. M., Michaleff, Z. A., Cottrell, M. A., McPhail, S. M., Hatton, A. L., Panizza, B. J.,
O'Leary, S. P. Prevalence, incidence, and risk factors for shoulder and neck dysfunction after
neck dissection: A systematic review. Eur J Surg Oncol; Jul 2017.
474. Jones, M. R., Prabhakar, A., Viswanath, O., Urits, I., Green, J. B., Kendrick, J. B., Brunk, A.
J., Eng, M. R., Orhurhu, V., Cornett, E. M., Kaye, A. D. Thoracic Outlet Syndrome: A
Comprehensive Review of Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Treatment. Pain Ther; Jun 2019.
475. Laulan, J., Fouquet, B., Rodaix, C., Jauffret, P., Roquelaure, Y., Descatha, A. Thoracic
outlet syndrome: definition, aetiological factors, diagnosis, management and occupational
impact. J Occup Rehabil; Sep 2011.
476. Sheth, R. N., Belzberg, A. J. Diagnosis and treatment of thoracic outlet syndrome.
Neurosurg Clin N Am; Apr 2001.
477. Wilbourn, A. J. The thoracic outlet syndrome is overdiagnosed. Arch Neurol; Mar 1990.
478. Hooper, T. L., Denton, J., McGalliard, M. K., Brismee, J. M., Sizer, P. S.,Jr. Thoracic outlet
syndrome: a controversial clinical condition. Part 1: anatomy, and clinical
examination/diagnosis. J Man Manip Ther; Jun 2010.
479. Watson, L. A., Pizzari, T., Balster, S. Thoracic outlet syndrome part 1: clinical
manifestations, differentiation and treatment pathways. Man Ther; Dec 2009.
480. Harkness, EF, MacFarlane, Gary John, Nahit, ES, Silman, AJ, McBeth, J. Mechanical and
psychosocial factors predict new onset shoulder pain: a prospective cohort study of newly
employed workers. Occupational and environmental medicine; 2003.
481. Beach, J., Senthilselvan, A., Cherry, N. Factors affecting work-related shoulder pain.
Occup Med (Lond); Sep 2012.
482. Pope, D. P., Silman, A. J., Cherry, N. M., Pritchard, C., Macfarlane, G. J. Association of
occupational physical demands and psychosocial working environment with disabling
shoulder pain. Ann Rheum Dis; Sep 2001.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

718

483. van der Windt, D. A., Thomas, E., Pope, D. P., de Winter, A. F., Macfarlane, G. J., Bouter,
L. M., Silman, A. J. Occupational risk factors for shoulder pain: a systematic review. Occup
Environ Med; Jul 2000.
484. McMaster, W. C., Troup, J. A survey of interfering shoulder pain in United States
competitive swimmers. Am J Sports Med; Jan-Feb 1993.
485. Rupp, S., Berninger, K., Hopf, T. Shoulder problems in high level swimmers-impingement, anterior instability, muscular imbalance?. Int J Sports Med; Nov 1995.
486. Richardson, A. B., Jobe, F. W., Collins, H. R. The shoulder in competitive swimming. Am J
Sports Med; May-Jun 1980.
487. Penny, J. N., Smith, C. The prevention and treatment of swimmer&#x27;s shoulder. Can
J Appl Sport Sci; Sep 1980.
488. Kennedy, J. C., Hawkins, R., Krissoff, W. B. Orthopaedic manifestations of swimming. Am
J Sports Med; Nov-Dec 1978.
489. Bak, K. and P. Fauno. Clinical findings in competitive swimmers with shoulder pain. Am J
Sports Med; 1997.
490. Stocker, D., Pink, M., Jobe, F. W. Comparison of shoulder injury in collegiate- and
master&#x27;s-level swimmers. Clin J Sport Med; 1995.
491. Thomas, E., Croft, P. R., Paterson, S. M., Dziedzic, K., Hay, E. M. What influence
participants&#x27; treatment preference and can it influence outcome? Results from a
primary care-based randomised trial for shoulder pain. British Journal of General Practice;
2004.
492. Main, C. J., Williams, A. C. Musculoskeletal pain. BMJ; Sep 7 2002.
493. De Bruijn, C.,et al. Evaluation of an education and activation programme to prevent
chronic shoulder complaints: design of an RCT. BMC Fam Pract; 2005.
494. Pesco, M. S., E., Chosa, N., Tajima. Comparative study of hands-on therapy with active
exercises vs education with active exercises for the management of upper back pain. J
Manipulative Physiol Ther; 2006.
495. De Bruijn, C., Goossens, M., de Bie, R., Ament, A., Geraets, J., Dinant, G. J. Costeffectiveness of an education and activation program for patients with acute and subacute
shoulder complaints compared to usual care. Int J Technol Assess Health Care; Winter 2007.
496. Dziedzic, K.,et al. Development and implementation of a physiotherapy intervention for
use in a pragmatic randomized controlled trial in primary care for shoulder pain.
Musculoskeletal Care; 2009.
497. Mongini, F.,et al. Long-term benefits of an educational and physical program on
headache, and neck and shoulder pain, in a working community. J Pain; 2009.
498. Lin, S.,et al. Educational program for myofascial pain syndrome. Journal of Alternative
&amp; Complementary Medicine; 2010.
499. von der Heyde, R. L. Occupational therapy interventions for shoulder conditions: a
systematic review. Am J Occup Ther; 2011.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

719

500. Manning, V. L.,et al. Education, self-management, and upper extremity exercise training
in people with rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized controlled trial. Arthritis Care Res
(Hoboken); 2014.
501. Shuai, J.,et al. Assessing the effects of an educational program for the prevention of
work-related musculoskeletal disorders among school teachers. BMC Public Health; 2014.
502. Chang, K. V.,et al. Early Versus Delayed Passive Range of Motion Exercise for Arthroscopic
Rotator Cuff Repair: A Meta-analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. Am J Sports Med; 2015.
503. Dragesund, T. and A. Kvale. Study protocol for Norwegian Psychomotor Physiotherapy
versus Cognitive Patient Education in combination with active individualized physiotherapy in
patients with long-lasting musculoskeletal pain - a randomized controlled trial. BMC
Musculoskelet Disord; 2016.
504. Karkucak, M.,et al. Education and Visual Information Improves Effectiveness of
Ultrasound-Guided Local Injections on Shoulder Pain and Associated Anxiety Level: A
Randomized Controlled Study. American Journal of Physical Medicine &amp; Rehabilitation;
2016.
505. George, S. Z., Dover, G. C., Wallace, M. R., Sack, B. K., Herbstman, D. M., Aydog, E.,
Fillingim, R. B. Biopsychosocial influence on exercise-induced delayed onset muscle soreness
at the shoulder: pain catastrophizing and catechol-o-methyltransferase (COMT) diplotype
predict pain ratings. Clin J Pain; Nov-Dec 2008.
506. van Eck, C. F.,et al. Web-Based Education Prior to Outpatient Orthopaedic Surgery
Enhances Early Patient Satisfaction Scores: A Prospective Randomized Controlled Study.
Orthopaedic Journal of Sports Medicine; 2018.
507. Li, Y. and M. Y. M. Tse. An Online Pain Education Program for Working Adults: Pilot
Randomized Controlled Trial. Journal of Medical Internet Research; 2020.
508. Rempel, D. M., Krause, N., Goldberg, R., Benner, D., Hudes, M., Goldner, G. U. A
randomised controlled trial evaluating the effects of two workstation interventions on upper
body pain and incident musculoskeletal disorders among computer operators. Occup Environ
Med; May 2006.
509. Verhagen, A. P., Karels, C., Bierma-Zeinstra, S. M., Burdorf, L., Feleus, A., Dahaghin, S., de
Vet, H. C., Koes, B. W. Ergonomic and physiotherapeutic interventions for treating workrelated complaints of the arm, neck or shoulder in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2006.
510. Voerman, Gerlienke E, Sandsjö, Leif, Vollenbroek-Hutten, Miriam MR, Larsman, Pernilla,
Kadefors, Roland, Hermens, Hermie J. Effects of ambulant myofeedback training and
ergonomic counselling in female computer workers with work-related neck-shoulder
complaints: a randomized controlled trial. Journal of occupational rehabilitation; 2007.
511. Voerman, Gerlienke E, Vollenbroek-Hutten, Miriam MR, Sandsjö, Leif, Kadefors, Roland,
Hermens, Hermie J. Prognostic factors for the effects of two interventions for work-related
neck–shoulder complaints: Myofeedback training and ergonomic counselling. Applied
ergonomics; 2008.
512. Krause, Niklas, Burgel, Barbara, Rempel, David. Effort-reward imbalance and one-year
change in neck-shoulder and upper-extremity pain among call center computer operators.
Scandinavian journal of work, environment &amp; health; 2010.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

720

513. Martimo, Kari-Pekka, Shiri, Rahman, Miranda, Helena, Ketola, Ritva, Varonen, Helena,
Viikari-Juntura, Eira. Effectiveness of an ergonomic intervention on the productivity of
workers with upper-extremity disorders-a randomized controlled trial. Scandinavian journal
of work, environment &amp; health; 2010.
514. Shiri, Rahman, Martimo, Kari-Pekka, Miranda, Helena, Ketola, Ritva, Kaila-Kangas, Leena,
Liira, Helena, Karppinen, Jaro, Viikari-Juntura, Eira. The effect of workplace intervention on
pain and sickness absence caused by upper-extremity musculoskeletal disorders.
Scandinavian journal of work, environment &amp; health; 2011.
515. Hoe, Victor CW, Urquhart, Donna M, Kelsall, Helen L, Sim, Malcolm R. Ergonomic design
and training for preventing work‐related musculoskeletal disorders of the upper limb and
neck in adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews; 2012.
516. Mahmud, Norashikin, Kenny, Dianna T, Rahman, Hamidah Ab. The effect of workplace
office ergonomics intervention on reducing neck and shoulder complaints and sickness
absence. International Proceedings of Economics Development &amp; Research; 2012.
517. Verhagen, Arianne P, Bierma‐Zeinstra, Sita MA, Burdorf, Alex, Stynes, Siobhan M, de Vet,
Henrica CW, Koes, Bart W. Conservative interventions for treating work‐related complaints of
the arm, neck or shoulder in adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews; 2013.
518. Esmaeilzadeh, Sina, Ozcan, Emel, Capan, Nalan. Effects of ergonomic intervention on
work-related upper extremity musculoskeletal disorders among computer workers: a
randomized controlled trial. International archives of occupational and environmental health;
2014.
519. Sundstrup, Emil, Jakobsen, Markus D, Brandt, Mikkel, Jay, Kenneth, Persson, Roger,
Aagaard, Per, Andersen, Lars L. Workplace strength training prevents deterioration of work
ability among workers with chronic pain and work disability: a randomized controlled trial.
Scandinavian journal of work, environment &amp; health; 2014.
520. Varatharajan, Sharanya, Côté, Pierre, Shearer, Heather M, Loisel, Patrick, Wong, Jessica
J, Southerst, Danielle, Yu, Hainan, Randhawa, Kristi, Sutton, Deborah, van der Velde, Gabrielle.
Are work disability prevention interventions effective for the management of neck pain or
upper extremity disorders? A systematic review by the Ontario Protocol for Traffic Injury
Management (OPTIMa) collaboration. Journal of occupational rehabilitation; 2014.
521. Aghilinejad, Mashallah, Kabir-Mokamelkhah, Elahe, Labbafinejad, Yasser, BahramiAhmadi, Amir, Hosseini, Hamid Reza. The role of ergonomic training interventions on
decreasing neck and shoulders pain among workers of an Iranian automobile factory: a
randomized trial study. Medical journal of the Islamic Republic of Iran; 2015.
522. Hutting, Nathan, Staal, J Bart, Engels, Josephine A, Heerkens, Yvonne F, Detaille, Sarah I,
Nijhuis-van der Sanden, Maria WG. Effect evaluation of a self-management programme for
employees with complaints of the arm, neck or shoulder: a randomised controlled trial.
Occupational and environmental medicine; 2015.
523. Lowry, Veronique, Desjardins-Charbonneau, Ariel, Roy, Jean-Sebastien, Dionne,
Clermont E, Fremont, Pierre, MacDermid, Joy C, Desmeules, Francois. Efficacy of workplace
interventions for shoulder pain: A systematic review and meta-analysis. 2017.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

721

524. Marik, Tambra L, Roll, Shawn C. Effectiveness of occupational therapy interventions for
musculoskeletal shoulder conditions: a systematic review. American Journal of Occupational
Therapy; 2017.
525. Hoe, Victor CW, Urquhart, Donna M, Kelsall, Helen L, Zamri, Eva N, Sim, Malcolm R.
Ergonomic interventions for preventing work‐related musculoskeletal disorders of the upper
limb and neck among office workers. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews; 2018.
526. Mulimani, Priti, Hoe, Victor CW, Hayes, Melanie J, Idiculla, Jose Joy, Abas, Adinegara BL,
Karanth, Laxminarayan. Ergonomic interventions for preventing musculoskeletal disorders in
dental care practitioners. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews; 2018.
527. Stock, Susan R, Nicolakakis, Nektaria, Vezina, M, Vezina, Nicole, Gilbert, Louis, Turcot,
Alice, Sultan-Taieb, Helene, Sinden, Kathryn, Denis, Marie-Agnès, Delga, Céline. Are work
organization interventions effective in preventing or reducing work-related musculoskeletal
disorders? A systematic review of the literature. 2018.
528. Tsang, Sharon MH, So, Billy CL, Lau, Rufina WL, Dai, Jie, Szeto, Grace PY. Effects of
combining ergonomic interventions and motor control exercises on muscle activity and
kinematics in people with work-related neck–shoulder pain. European journal of applied
physiology; 2018.
529. Bazazan A, et al. Effect of a posture correction–based intervention on musculoskeletal
symptoms and fatigue among control room operators. Appl Ergonomics; 2019.
530. Karimian, Razieh, Rahnama, Nader, Ghasemi, Gholamali, Lenjannejadian, Shahram.
Photogrammetric Analysis of Upper Cross Syndrome among Teachers and the Effects of
National Academy of Sports Medicine Exercises with Ergonomic Intervention on the
Syndrome. Journal of research in health sciences; 2019.
531. So BC, et al. Effects of ergomotor intervention on improving occupational health in
workers with work-related neck-shoulder pain. Int J Environ Res Public Health; 2019.
532. Tsang, Sharon MH, So, Billy CL, Lau, Rufina WL, Dai, Jie, Szeto, Grace PY. Comparing the
effectiveness of integrating ergonomics and motor control to conventional treatment for pain
and functional recovery of work‐related neck–shoulder pain: A randomized trial. European
Journal of Pain; 2019.
533. Keogh, J. P., Nuwayhid, I., Gordon, J. L., Gucer, P. W. The impact of occupational injury
on injured worker and family: outcomes of upper extremity cumulative trauma disorders in
Maryland workers. Am J Ind Med; Nov 2000.
534. Nakphet, Nuttika, Chaikumarn, Montakarn, Janwantanakul, Prawit. Effect of different
types of rest-break interventions on neck and shoulder muscle activity, perceived discomfort
and productivity in symptomatic VDU operators: a randomized controlled trial. International
journal of occupational safety and ergonomics; 2014.
535. Baker, Nancy A, Moehling, Krissy K, Park, Seo Young. The effect of an alternative
keyboard on musculoskeletal discomfort: A randomized cross-over trial. Work; 2015.
536. Conlon, Craig F, Krause, Niklas, Rempel, David M. A randomised controlled trial
evaluating an alternative mouse and forearm support on upper body discomfort and
musculoskeletal disorders among engineers. Occupational and environmental medicine;
2008.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

722

537. Basahel, Abdulrahman M. Evaluation of the Impact of Engineering Ergonomic
Interventions on Musculoskeletal Hazards and Psychosocial Factors Among Packaging
Workers in a Food Factory. 2016.
538. Lowe, Brian D, Shaw, Peter B, Wilson, Sean R, Whitaker, John R, Witherspoon, Greg J,
Hudock, Stephen D, Barrero, Marisol, Ray, Tapas K, Wurzelbacher, Steven J. Evaluation of a
workplace exercise program for control of shoulder disorders in overhead assembly work.
Journal of occupational and environmental medicine; 2017.
539. Sanaeinasab, Hormoz, Saffari, Mohsen, Valipour, Firouz, Alipour, Hassan Reza, Sepandi,
Mojtaba, Al Zaben, Faten, Koenig, Harold G. The effectiveness of a model-based health
education intervention to improve ergonomic posture in office computer workers: A
randomized controlled trial. International archives of occupational and environmental health;
2018.
540. Rempel, DM, Krause, N, Goldberg, R, Benner, D, Hudes, M, Goldner, GU. A randomised
controlled trial evaluating the effects of two workstation interventions on upper body pain
and incident musculoskeletal disorders among computer operators. Occupational and
environmental medicine; 2006.
541. Dropkin, Jonathan, Kim, Hyun, Punnett, Laura, Wegman, David H, Warren, Nicholas,
Buchholz, Bryan. Effect of an office ergonomic randomised controlled trial among workers
with neck and upper extremity pain. Occupational and environmental medicine; 2015.
542. Shariat, Ardalan, Cleland, Joshua A, Danaee, Mahmoud, Kargarfard, Mehdi, Sangelaji,
Bahram, Tamrin, Shamsul Bahri Mohd. Effects of stretching exercise training and ergonomic
modifications on musculoskeletal discomforts of office workers: a randomized controlled
trial. Brazilian journal of physical therapy; 2018.
543. Ting, Joshua Zheng Rui, Chen, Xiaoqi, Johnston, Venerina. Workplace-Based Exercise
Intervention Improves Work Ability in Office Workers: A Cluster Randomised Controlled Trial.
International journal of environmental research and public health; 2019.
544. Choobineh, Alireza, Motamedzade, Majid, Kazemi, Maryam, Moghimbeigi, Abbas,
Pahlavian, Ahmad Heidari. The impact of ergonomics intervention on psychosocial factors and
musculoskeletal symptoms among office workers. International Journal of Industrial
Ergonomics; 2011.
545. Taieb-Maimon, Meirav, Cwikel, Julie, Shapira, Bracha, Orenstein, Ido. The effectiveness
of a training method using self-modeling webcam photos for reducing musculoskeletal risk
among office workers using computers. Applied ergonomics; 2012.
546. Robertson, Michelle M, Ciriello, Vincent M, Garabet, Angela M. Office ergonomics
training and a sit-stand workstation: Effects on musculoskeletal and visual symptoms and
performance of office workers. Applied ergonomics; 2013.
547. Baydur, Hakan, Ergör, Alp, Demiral, Yücel, Akalın, Elif. Effects of participatory ergonomic
intervention on the development of upper extremity musculoskeletal disorders and disability
in office employees using a computer. Journal of occupational health; 2016.
548. Mahmud, Norashikin, Kenny, Dianna Theadora, Zein, Raemy Md, Hassan, Siti Nurani.
Ergonomic training reduces musculoskeletal disorders among office workers: results from the
6-month follow-up. The Malaysian journal of medical sciences: MJMS; 2011.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

723

549. Cann, A. P., Connolly, M., Ruuska, R., MacNeil, M., Birmingham, T. B., Vandervoort, A. A.,
Callaghan, J. P. Inter-rater reliability of output measures for a posture matching assessment
approach: a pilot study with food service workers. Ergonomics; Apr 2008.
550. Stephens, J. P., Vos, G. A., Stevens, E. M.,Jr., Moore, J. S. Test-retest repeatability of the
Strain Index. Appl Ergon; May 2006.
551. Rucker, N., Moore, J. S. Predictive validity of the strain index in manufacturing facilities.
Appl Occup Environ Hyg; Jan 2002.
552. Hughes, R. E., An, K. N. Force analysis of rotator cuff muscles. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Sep
1996.
553. Turner, J. A., Franklin, G., Fulton-Kehoe, D., Sheppard, L., Wickizer, T. M., Wu, R., Gluck,
J. V., Egan, K., Stover, B. Early predictors of chronic work disability associated with carpal
tunnel syndrome: a longitudinal workers&#x27; compensation cohort study. Am J Ind Med;
Jul 2007.
554. Bonzani, P. J., Millender, L., Keelan, B., Mangieri, M. G. Factors prolonging disability in
work-related cumulative trauma disorders. J Hand Surg Am; Jan 1997.
555. Gimeno, D., Amick, B. C.,3rd, Habeck, R. V., Ossmann, J., Katz, J. N. The role of job strain
on return to work after carpal tunnel surgery. Occup Environ Med; Nov 2005.
556. Faber, E., Kuiper, J. I., Burdorf, A., Miedema, H. S., Verhaar, J. A. Treatment of
impingement syndrome: a systematic review of the effects on functional limitations and
return to work. J Occup Rehabil; Mar 2006.
557. Cheng, A. S., Hung, L. K. Randomized controlled trial of workplace-based rehabilitation
for work-related rotator cuff disorder. J Occup Rehabil; Sep 2007.
558. Lomond, K. V., Côté, J. N. Shoulder functional assessments in persons with chronic
neck/shoulder pain and healthy subjects: Reliability and effects of movement repetition.
Work; 2011.
559. Moshe, S., Izhaki, R., Chodick, G., Segal, N., Yagev, Y., Finestone, A. S., Juven, Y. Predictors
of return to work with upper limb disorders. Occup Med (Lond); Oct 2015.
560. Armijo-Olivo, S., Woodhouse, L. J., Steenstra, I. A., Gross, D. P. Predictive value of the
DASH tool for predicting return to work of injured workers with musculoskeletal disorders of
the upper extremity. Occup Environ Med; Dec 2016.
561. Desmeules, F., Braën, C., Lamontagne, M., Dionne, C. E., Roy, J. S. Determinants and
predictors of absenteeism and return-to-work in workers with shoulder disorders. Work; Sep
27 2016.
562. Garcia, G. H., Taylor, S. A., Mahony, G. T., DePalma, B. J., Grawe, B. M., Nguyen, J., Dines,
J. S., Dines, D. M., Warren, R. F., Craig, E. V., Gulotta, L. V. Reverse total shoulder arthroplasty
and work-related outcomes. Orthopedics; Mar-Apr 2016.
563. Moll, L. T., Jensen, O. K., Schiøttz-Christensen, B., Stapelfeldt, C. M., Christiansen, D. H.,
Nielsen, C. V., Labriola, M. Return to work in employees on sick leave due to neck or shoulder
pain: a randomized clinical trial comparing multidisciplinary and brief intervention with oneyear register-based follow-up. J Occup Rehabil; Jun 2018.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

724

564. Minns Lowe, C.,et al. Clinical effectiveness of non-surgical interventions for primary
frozen shoulder: A systematic review. Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine; 2019.
565. Talmage, JB,Melhorn,JM,Hyman,MH. AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Work Ability and
Return to Work. Chicago, IL: American Medical Association; 2011.
566. Arnetz, BB,Sjogren,B,Rydehn,B,Meisel,R. Early workplace intervention for employees
with musculoskeletal-related absenteeism: a prospective controlled intervention study. J
Occup Environ Med; 2003.
567. Kuijpers, T., van der Windt, D. A., van der Heijden, G. J., Twisk, J. W., Vergouwe, Y.,
Bouter, L. M. A prediction rule for shoulder pain related sick leave: a prospective cohort study.
BMC Musculoskelet Disord; 2006.
568. Lotters, F., Burdorf, A. Prognostic factors for duration of sickness absence due to
musculoskeletal disorders. Clin J Pain; Feb 2006.
569. Hashimoto, Takashi, Nobuhara, Katsuya, Hamada, Tetsuo. Pathologic evidence of
degeneration as a primary cause of rotator cuff tear. Clinical Orthopaedics and Related
Research®; 2003.
570. Hegedus, Eric J, Cook, Chad, Brennan, Matthew, Wyland, Douglas, Garrison, J Craig,
Driesner, Dawn. Vascularity and tendon pathology in the rotator cuff: a review of literature
and implications for rehabilitation and surgery. British journal of sports medicine; 2010.
571. Luime, Jolanda J, Kuiper, Judith I, Koes, Bart W, Verhaar, Jan AN, Miedema, Harald S,
Burdorf, Alex. Work-related risk factors for the incidence and recurrence of shoulder and neck
complaints among nursing-home and elderly-care workers. Scandinavian journal of work,
environment &amp; health; 2004.
572. Kaergaard, Anette, Hansen, Åse M, Rasmussen, Kurt, Andersen, Johan H. Association
between plasma testosterone and work-related neck and shoulder disorders among female
workers. Scandinavian journal of work, environment &amp; health; 2000.
573. Miranda, Marta Oñate, Bureau, Nathalie J. Supraspinatus myotendinous junction
injuries: MRI findings and prevalence. American Journal of Roentgenology; 2019.
574. Hackett, Lisa, Millar, Neal L, Lam, Patrick, Murrell, George AC. Are the symptoms of
calcific tendinitis due to neoinnervation and/or neovascularization?. JBJS; 2016.
575. Kardouni, Joseph R, Seitz, Amee L, Walsworth, Matthew K, Michener, Lori A.
Neovascularization prevalence in the supraspinatus of patients with rotator cuff
tendinopathy. Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine; 2013.
576. Shindle, Michael K, Chen, Christopher CT, Robertson, Catherine, DiTullio, Alexandra E,
Paulus, Megan C, Clinton, Camille M, Cordasco, Frank A, Rodeo, Scott A, Warren, Russell F.
Full-thickness supraspinatus tears are associated with more synovial inflammation and tissue
degeneration than partial-thickness tears. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2011.
577. HajAssaad, Ahmad, Willacy, Rolanda, Wilson, Robert. A Systematic Review of the
Histological and Molecular Changes in the Subacromial Bursa in Rotator Cuff Disease. Journal
of surgical orthopaedic advances; 2020.
578. Plachel, Fabian, Heuberer, Philipp, Gehwolf, Renate, Frank, Julia, Tempfer, Herbert,
Lehner, Christine, Weissenbacher, Nadja, Wagner, Andrea, Weigl, Moritz, Moroder, Philipp.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

725

MicroRNA profiling reveals distinct signatures in degenerative rotator cuff pathologies.
Journal of Orthopaedic Research®; 2020.
579. Miao, Kaisong, Jiang, Lifeng, Zhou, Xindie, Wu, Lidong, Huang, Yong, Xu, Nanwei, Zhang,
Junjie, Li, Jin. Role of matrix metalloproteases 1/3 gene polymorphisms in patients with
rotator cuff tear. Bioscience reports; 2019.
580. Raz, Yotam, Henseler, Jan Ferdinand, Kolk, Arjen, Tatum, Zuotian, Groosjohan, Niels
Kuipers, Verwey, Nisha E, Arindrarto, Wibowo, Kielbasa, Szymon M, Nagels, Jochem, AC't
Hoen, Peter. Molecular signatures of age-associated chronic degeneration of shoulder
muscles. Oncotarget; 2016.
581. Li, Jia, Liu, Zheng-Peng, Xu, Cong, Guo, Ai. TGF-β1-containing exosomes derived from
bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells promote proliferation, migration and fibrotic activity
in rotator cuff tenocytes. Regenerative therapy; 2020.
582. Shih, Chien-An, Wu, Kuo-Chen, Shao, Chung-Jung, Chern, Tai-Chang, Su, Wei-Ren, Wu,
Po-Ting, Jou, I-Ming. Synovial fluid biomarkers: association with chronic rotator cuff tear
severity and pain. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2018.
583. Abrams, Geoffrey D, Luria, Ayala, Carr, Rebecca A, Rhodes, Christopher, Robinson,
William H, Sokolove, Jeremy. Association of synovial inflammation and inflammatory
mediators with glenohumeral rotator cuff pathology. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery;
2016.
584. Suh, Young Sun, Kim, Hyun-Ok, Cheon, Yun-Hong, Kim, Mingyo, Kim, Rock-Bum, Park, KiSoo, Park, Hyung Bin, Na, Jae-Beom, Moon, Jin Il, Lee, Sang-Il. Metabolic and inflammatory
links to rotator cuff tear in hand osteoarthritis: A cross sectional study. PloS one; 2020.
585. Gumina, Stefano, Villani, Ciro, Arceri, Valerio, Fagnani, Corrado, Nisticò, Lorenza,
Venditto, Teresa, Castagna, Alessandro, Candela, Vittorio. Rotator Cuff Degeneration: The
Role of Genetics. JBJS; 2019.
586. Seo, C. M., Kim, K., Jeon, A., Uhm, C. S., Lee, J. H., Han, S. H. Clinical Anatomy for the
Innervated Pattern and Boundary of the Subdeltoid Bursa. Biomed Res Int; 2018.
587. Yamaguchi, K, Tetro, AM, Blam, O, Evanoff, BA, Teefey, SA, Middleton, WD. Natural
history of asymptomatic rotator cuff tears: a longitudinal analysis of asymptomatic tears
detected sonographically. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; 2001.
588. Barreto, Rodrigo Py Gonçalves, Braman, Jonathan P, Ludewig, Paula M, Ribeiro, Larissa
Pechincha, Camargo, Paula Rezende. Bilateral magnetic resonance imaging findings in
individuals with unilateral shoulder pain. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2019.
589. Hegmann, Kurt T, Thiese, Matthew S, Wood, Eric M, Garg, Arun, Kapellusch, Jay M,
Foster, James, Biggs, Jeremy, Edwards, Hannah, Wertsch, Jacqueline, Kendall, Richard.
Impacts of differences in epidemiological case definitions on prevalence for upper-extremity
musculoskeletal disorders. Human factors; 2014.
590. Sgroi, Mirco, Loitsch, Thomas, Reichel, Heiko, Kappe, Thomas. Diagnostic value of clinical
tests for supraspinatus tendon tears. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic &amp; Related
Surgery; 2018.
591. Hegedus, E. J., Goode, A. P., Cook, C. E., Michener, L., Myer, C. A., Myer, D. M., Wright,
A. A. Which physical examination tests provide clinicians with the most value when examining
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

726

the shoulder? Update of a systematic review with meta-analysis of individual tests. Br J Sports
Med; Nov 2012.
592. Network-Shoulder, Multicenter,Orthopaedic,Outcomes. Interobserver agreement in the
classification of rotator cuff tears. The American journal of sports medicine; 2007.
593. Edwards, Anne, Chepeha, Judy, Jones, Allyson, Sheps, David M, Beaupré, Lauren. Can
clinical assessment differentiate partial thickness rotator cuff tears from full thickness rotator
cuff tears? A secondary analysis. Disability and rehabilitation; 2020.
594. Bokor, D. J., Hawkins, R. J., Huckell, G. H., Angelo, R. L., Schickendantz, M. S. Results of
nonoperative management of full-thickness tears of the rotator cuff. Clin Orthop Relat Res;
Sep 1993.
595. Itoi, E., Tabata, S. Conservative treatment of rotator cuff tears. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Feb
1992.
596. Goldberg, B. A., Nowinski, R. J., Matsen, F. A.,3rd. Outcome of nonoperative
management of full-thickness rotator cuff tears. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Jan 2001.
597. Seo, H. G., Bang, M. S., Chung, S. G., Jung, S. H., Lee, S. U. Effect of electrical stimulation
on botulinum toxin a therapy in patients with chronic myofascial pain syndrome: a 16-week
randomized double-blinded study. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Mar 2013.
598. Shanthanna, H., Busse, J. W., Thabane, L., Paul, J., Couban, R., Choudhary, H., Kaushal,
A., Suzumura, E., Kim, I., Harsha, P. Local anesthetic injections with or without steroid for
chronic non-cancer pain: A protocol for a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Systematic Reviews; 2016.
599. Gotoh, Masafumi, Hamada, Kazutoshi, Yamakawa, Hideyuki, Tomonaga, Akihito, Inoue,
Akio, Fukuda, Hiroaki. Significance of granulation tissue in torn supraspinatus insertions: An
immunohistochemical study with antibodies against interleukin‐1β, cathepsin D, and matrix
metalloprotease‐1. Journal of orthopaedic research; 1997.
600. Matthews, T. J., Hand, G. C., Rees, J. L., Athanasou, N. A., Carr, A. J. Pathology of the torn
rotator cuff tendon. Reduction in potential for repair as tear size increases. J Bone Joint Surg
Br; Apr 2006.
601. Gotoh, M., Hamada, K., Yamakawa, H., Yanagisawa, K., Nakamura, M., Yamazaki, H.,
Ueyama, Y., Tamaoki, N., Inoue, A., Fukuda, H. Interleukin-1-induced subacromial synovitis
and shoulder pain in rotator cuff diseases. Rheumatology (Oxford); Sep 2001.
602. Lho, Y. M., Ha, E., Cho, C. H., Song, K. S., Min, B. W., Bae, K. C., Lee, K. J., Hwang, I., Park,
H. B. Inflammatory cytokines are overexpressed in the subacromial bursa of frozen shoulder.
J Shoulder Elbow Surg; May 2013.
603. Longo, U. G., Rizzello, G., Berton, A., Maltese, L., Fumo, C., Khan, W. S., Denaro, V.
Biological strategies to enhance rotator cuff healing. Curr Stem Cell Res Ther; Nov 2013.
604. Millar, N. L., Reilly, J. H., Kerr, S. C., Campbell, A. L., Little, K. J., Leach, W. J., Rooney, B.
P., Murrell, G. A., McInnes, I. B. Hypoxia: a critical regulator of early human tendinopathy. Ann
Rheum Dis; Feb 2012.
605. Millar, N. L., Wei, A. Q., Molloy, T. J., Bonar, F., Murrell, G. A. Cytokines and apoptosis in
supraspinatus tendinopathy. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Mar 2009.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

727

606. Pedersen, B. K., Steensberg, A., Schjerling, P. Muscle-derived interleukin-6: possible
biological effects. J Physiol; Oct 15 2001.
607. Rosendal, L., Kristiansen, J., Gerdle, B., Sogaard, K., Peolsson, M., Kjaer, M., Sorensen, J.,
Larsson, B. Increased levels of interstitial potassium but normal levels of muscle IL-6 and LDH
in patients with trapezius myalgia. Pain; Dec 15 2005.
608. Wu, G., Xu, P. C., Wu, P., Hu, K., Sun, Y., Cheng, B., Lu, Y. Advances in the treatment of
rotator cuff lesions by cytokines. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed); Jan 1 2017.
609. Yamazaki, H., Ochiai, N., Kenmoku, T., Ohtori, S., Sasho, T., Miyagi, M., Ishikawa, T.,
Kamoda, H., Orita, S., Sasaki, Y., Yamaguchi, T., Kijima, T., Takahashi, K. Assessment of painrelated behavior and pro-inflammatory cytokine levels in the rat rotator cuff tear model. J
Orthop Res; Feb 2014.
610. Hardy, D. C., Vogler, J. B.,3rd, White, R. H. The shoulder impingement syndrome:
prevalence of radiographic findings and correlation with response to therapy. AJR Am J
Roentgenol; Sep 1986.
611. Barile, A., Bruno, F., Mariani, S., Arrigoni, F., Reginelli, A., De Filippo, M., Zappia, M.,
Splendiani, A., Di Cesare, E., Masciocchi, C. What can be seen after rotator cuff repair: a brief
review of diagnostic imaging findings. Musculoskelet Surg; Mar 2017.
612. Burbank, K. M., Stevenson, J. H., Czarnecki, G. R., Dorfman, J. Chronic shoulder pain: part
I. Evaluation and diagnosis. Am Fam Physician; Feb 15 2008.
613. Cadogan, A., McNair, P. J., Laslett, M., Hing, W. A. Diagnostic Accuracy of Clinical
Examination and Imaging Findings for Identifying Subacromial Pain. PLoS One; 2016.
614. Guckel, C., Nidecker, A. Diagnosis of tears in rotator-cuff-injuries. Eur J Radiol; Nov 1997.
615. Hussain, Adnan, Muzzammil, Muhammad, Butt, Faisal, Valsamis, Epaminondas Markos,
Dwyer, Amitabh J. Effectiveness of plain shoulder radiograph in detecting degenerate rotator
cuff tears. Journal of Ayub Medical College Abbottabad; 2018.
616. Kim, J. H., Gwak, H. C., Kim, C. W., Lee, C. R., Kwon, Y. U., Seo, H. W. Difference of Critical
Shoulder Angle (CSA) According to Minimal Rotation: Can Minimal Rotation of the Scapula Be
Allowed in the Evaluation of CSA?. Clin Orthop Surg; Sep 2019.
617. Loew, M., Magosch, P., Lichtenberg, S., Habermeyer, P., Porschke, F. How to discriminate
between acute traumatic and chronic degenerative rotator cuff lesions: an analysis of specific
criteria on radiography and magnetic resonance imaging. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Nov 2015.
618. Song, J. G., Yun, S. J., Song, Y. W., Lee, S. H. High performance of critical shoulder angle
for diagnosing rotator cuff tears on radiographs. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc; Jan
2019.
619. Zhang, C., Skalli, W., Lagace, P. Y., Billuart, F., Ohl, X., Cresson, T., Bureau, N. J., Rouleau,
D. M., Roy, A., Tetreault, P., Sauret, C., de Guise, J. A., Hagemeister, N. Investigation of 3D
glenohumeral displacements from 3D reconstruction using biplane X-ray images: Accuracy
and reproducibility of the technique and preliminary analysis in rotator cuff tear patients. J
Electromyogr Kinesiol; Aug 2016.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

728

620. Bryant, L., Shnier, R., Bryant, C., Murrell, G. A. A comparison of clinical estimation,
ultrasonography, magnetic resonance imaging, and arthroscopy in determining the size of
rotator cuff tears. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; May-Jun 2002.
621. Singisetti, Kiran, Hinsche, Andreas. Shoulder ultrasonography versus arthroscopy for the
detection of rotator cuff tears: analysis of errors. Journal of Orthopaedic Surgery; 2011.
622. Teefey, S. A., Hasan, S. A., Middleton, W. D., Patel, M., Wright, R. W., Yamaguchi, K.
Ultrasonography of the rotator cuff. A comparison of ultrasonographic and arthroscopic
findings in one hundred consecutive cases. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Apr 2000.
623. Ward, Jonathan RN, Lotfi, Naeil, Dias, Richard G, McBride, Timothy J. Diagnostic
difficulties in the radiological assessment of subscapularis tears. Journal of orthopaedics;
2018.
624. Fouse, M., Nottage, W. M. All-arthroscopic rotator cuff repair. Sports Med Arthrosc; Dec
2007.
625. Abrams, J. S. Arthroscopic approach to massive rotator cuff tears. Instr Course Lect; 2006.
626. Baker, C. L., Whaley, A. L., Baker, M. Arthroscopic rotator cuff tear repair. J Surg Orthop
Adv; Winter 2003.
627. Ahmad, C. S., Levine, W. N., Bigliani, L. U. Arthroscopic rotator cuff repair. Orthopedics;
Jun 2004.
628. Boszotta, H., Prunner, K. Arthroscopically assisted rotator cuff repair. Arthroscopy; Jul
2004.
629. van de Sande, Michiel AJ, Stoel, Berend C, Obermann, Wim R, a Lieng, John GS Tjong,
Rozing, Piet M. Quantitative assessment of fatty degeneration in rotator cuff muscles
determined with computed tomography. Investigative radiology; 2005.
630. Moghekar, A. R., Karli, N., Chaudhry, V. Brachial plexopathies: etiology, frequency, and
electrodiagnostic localization. J Clin Neuromuscul Dis; Sep 2007.
631. Wilbourn, A. J. Plexopathies. Neurol Clin; Feb 2007.
632. Mayer, T. G., Gatchel, R. J., Mayer, H., Kishino, N. D., Keeley, J., Mooney, V. A prospective
two-year study of functional restoration in industrial low back injury. An objective assessment
procedure. Jama; Oct 2 1987.
633. Abdel-Moty, E., Fishbain, D. A., Khalil, T. M., Sadek, S., Cutler, R., Rosomoff, R. S.,
Rosomoff, H. L. Functional capacity and residual functional capacity and their utility in
measuring work capacity. Clin J Pain; Sep 1993.
634. Chan, G., Tan, V., Koh, D. Ageing and fitness to work. Occup Med (Lond); Sep 2000.
635. Gouttebarge, V., Wind, H., Kuijer, P. P., Frings-Dresen, M. H. Reliability and validity of
Functional Capacity Evaluation methods: a systematic review with reference to Blankenship
system, Ergos work simulator, Ergo-Kit and Isernhagen work system. Int Arch Occup Environ
Health; Nov 2004.
636. Gross, D. P., Battie, M. C. Functional capacity evaluation performance does not predict
sustained return to work in claimants with chronic back pain. J Occup Rehabil; Sep 2005.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

729

637. Gross, DP, Battie, MC, A, Asante. Development and validation of a short-form functional
capacity evaluation for use in claimants with low back disorders. J Occup Rehabil; 2006.
638. Ilmarinen, J., Tuomi, K., Eskelinen, L., Nygard, C. H., Huuhtanen, P., Klockars, M.
Background and objectives of the Finnish research project on aging workers in municipal
occupations. Scand J Work Environ Health; 1991.
639. Jones, T., Kumar, S. Functional capacity evaluation of manual materials handlers: a
review. Disabil Rehabil; Feb 18-Mar 4 2003.
640. Kaplan, G. M., Wurtele, S. K., Gillis, D. Maximal effort during functional capacity
evaluations: an examination of psychological factors. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Feb 1996.
641. King, P. M., Tuckwell, N., Barrett, T. E. A critical review of functional capacity evaluations.
Phys Ther; Aug 1998.
642. Kuijer, P. P., Gouttebarge, V., Brouwer, S., Reneman, M. F., Frings-Dresen, M. H. Are
performance-based measures predictive of work participation in patients with
musculoskeletal disorders? A systematic review. Int Arch Occup Environ Health; Feb 2012.
643. Mahmud, N., Schonstein, E., Schaafsma, F., Lehtola, M. M., Fassier, J. B., Verbeek, J. H.,
Reneman, M. F. Functional capacity evaluations for the prevention of occupational re-injuries
in injured workers. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2010.
644. Marfeo, E. E., Haley, S. M., Jette, A. M., Eisen, S. V., Ni, P., Bogusz, K., Meterko, M.,
McDonough, C. M., Chan, L., Brandt, D. E., Rasch, E. K. Conceptual foundation for measures
of physical function and behavioral health function for Social Security work disability
evaluation. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Sep 2013.
645. McFadden, S., MacDonald, A., Fogarty, A., Le, S., Merritt, B. K. Vocational assessment: a
review of the literature from an occupation-based perspective. Scand J Occup Ther; 2010.
646. Oesch, P., Meyer, K., Bachmann, S., Hagen, K. B., Vollestad, N. K. Comparison of two
methods for interpreting lifting performance during functional capacity evaluation. Phys Ther;
Sep 2012.
647. Reneman, M. F., Kool, J., Oesch, P., Geertzen, J. H., Battie, M. C., Gross, D. P. Material
handling performance of patients with chronic low back pain during functional capacity
evaluation: a comparison between three countries. Disabil Rehabil; Sep 30 2006.
648. Spanjer, J., Groothoff, J. W., Brouwer, S. Instruments used to assess functional limitations
in workers applying for disability benefit: a systematic review. Disabil Rehabil; 2011.
649. Tramposh, A. K. The functional capacity evaluation: measuring maximal work abilities.
Occup Med; Jan-Mar 1992.
650. Tuomi, K., Ilmarinen, J., Martikainen, R., Aalto, L., Klockars, M. Aging, work, life-style and
work ability among Finnish municipal workers in 1981-1992. Scand J Work Environ Health;
1997.
651. van Abbema, R., Lakke, S. E., Reneman, M. F., van der Schans, C. P., van Haastert, C. J.,
Geertzen, J. H., Wittink, H. Factors associated with functional capacity test results in patients
with non-specific chronic low back pain: a systematic review. J Occup Rehabil; Dec 2011.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

730

652. Wind, H., Gouttebarge, V., Kuijer, P. P., Sluiter, J. K., Frings-Dresen, M. H. Effect of
Functional Capacity Evaluation information on the judgment of physicians about physical
work ability in the context of disability claims. Int Arch Occup Environ Health; Oct 2009.
653. Gibson, L., Strong, J. Safety issues in functional capacity evaluation: findings from a trial
of a new approach for evaluating clients with chronic back pain. J Occup Rehabil; Jun 2005.
654. Gibson, L., Strong, J., Wallace, A. Functional capacity evaluation as a performance
measure: evidence for a new approach for clients with chronic back pain. Clin J Pain; May-Jun
2005.
655. Spanjer, J., Krol, B., Brouwer, S., Popping, R., Groothoff, J. W., van der Klink, J. J. Reliability
and validity of the Disability Assessment Structured Interview (DASI): a tool for assessing
functional limitations in claimants. J Occup Rehabil; Mar 2010.
656. Mulyadi, E., Harish, S., O'Neill, J., Rebello, R. MRI of impingement syndromes of the
shoulder. Clin Radiol; Mar 2009.
657. Chang, E. Y., Moses, D. A., Babb, J. S., Schweitzer, M. E. Shoulder impingement: objective
3D shape analysis of acromial morphologic features. Radiology; May 2006.
658. Tuite, M. J., Cirillo, R. L., De Smet, A. A., Orwin, J. F. Superior labrum anterior-posterior
(SLAP) tears: evaluation of three MR signs on T2-weighted images. Radiology; Jun 2000.
659. Connell, DA, Potter, HG, Wickiewicz, TL, Altchek, DW,, Warren, RF. Noncontrast magnetic
resonance imaging of superior labral lesions: 102 cases confirmed at arthroscopic surgery.
American Journal of Sports Medicine; Mar-Apr 1999.
660. McFarland, E.G., Tanaka, M. J., Garzon-Muvdi, J., Jia, X., Petersen, S. A. Clinical and
imaging assessment for superior labrum anterior and posterior lesions. Current Sports
Medicine Reports; Sep-Oct 2009.
661. Cartland, J. P., Crues, J. V.,3rd, Stauffer, A., Nottage, W., Ryu, R. K. MR imaging in the
evaluation of SLAP injuries of the shoulder: findings in 10 patients. AJR American Journal Of
Roentgenology; Oct 1992.
662. Chang, D., Mohana-Borges, A., Borso, M., Chung, C. B. SLAP lesions: anatomy, clinical
presentation, MR imaging diagnosis and characterization. Eur J Radiol; Oct 2008.
663. Tirman, P. F., Bost, F. W., Steinbach, L. S., Mall, J. C., Peterfy, C. G., Sampson, T. G.,
Sheehan, W. E., Forbes, J. R., Genant, H. K. MR arthrographic depiction of tears of the rotator
cuff: benefit of abduction and external rotation of the arm. Radiology; Sep 1994.
664. Wnorowski, D. C., Levinsohn, E. M., Chamberlain, B. C., McAndrew, D. L. Magnetic
resonance imaging assessment of the rotator cuff: is it really accurate?. Arthroscopy; Dec
1997.
665. Tung, G. A., Entzian, D., Green, A., Brody, J. M. High-field and low-field MR imaging of
superior glenoid labral tears and associated tendon injuries. AJR Am J Roentgenol; Apr 2000.
666. Reuss, B. L., Schwartzberg, R., Zlatkin, M. B., Cooperman, A., Dixon. Magnetic resonance
imaging accuracy for the diagnosis of superior labrum anterior-posterior lesions in the
community setting: eighty-three arthroscopically confirmed cases. Journal Of Shoulder And
Elbow Surgery; Sep-Oct 2006.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

731

667. Ostor, A. J., Richards, C. A., Tytherleigh-Strong, G., Bearcroft, P. W., Prevost, A. T., Speed,
C. A., Hazleman, B. L. Validation of clinical examination versus magnetic resonance imaging
and arthroscopy for the detection of rotator cuff lesions. Clin Rheumatol; Sep 2013.
668. Brockmeyer, M., Schmitt, C., Haupert, A., Kohn, D., Lorbach, O. Limited diagnostic
accuracy of magnetic resonance imaging and clinical tests for detecting partial-thickness tears
of the rotator cuff. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg; Dec 2017.
669. Desjardins-Charbonneau, Ariel, Roy, Jean-Sébastien, Dionne, Clermont E, Frémont,
Pierre, MacDermid, Joy C, Desmeules, François. The efficacy of manual therapy for rotator
cuff tendinopathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. journal of orthopaedic &amp;
sports physical therapy; 2015.
670. Chang, C. Y., Wang, S. F., Chiou, H. J., Ma, H. L., Sun, Y. C., Wu, H. D. Comparison of
shoulder ultrasound and MR imaging in diagnosing full-thickness rotator cuff tears. Clin
Imaging; Jan-Feb 2002.
671. Chingkoe, C. M., White, J. H., Louis, L. J., Andrews, G., Forster, B. B. Rotator cuff
troublemakers: pitfalls of MRI and ultrasound. Open Access J Sports Med; 2010.
672. Choo, H. J., Lee, S. J., Kim, O. H., Seo, S. S., Kim, J. H. Comparison of three-dimensional
isotropic T1-weighted fast spin-echo MR arthrography with two-dimensional MR
arthrography of the shoulder. Radiology; Mar 2012.
673. Cortes, A., Quinlan, N. J., Nazal, M. R., Upadhyaya, S., Alpaugh, K., Martin, S. D. A valuebased care analysis of magnetic resonance imaging in patients with suspected rotator cuff
tendinopathy and the implicated role of conservative management. J Shoulder Elbow Surg;
Nov 2019.
674. de Jesus, J. O., Parker, L., Frangos, A. J., Nazarian, L. N. Accuracy of MRI, MR arthrography,
and ultrasound in the diagnosis of rotator cuff tears: a meta-analysis. AJR Am J Roentgenol;
Jun 2009.
675. Diehr, S., Ison, D., Jamieson, B., Oh, R. Clinical inquiries. What is the best way to diagnose
a suspected rotator cuff tear?. J Fam Pract; Jul 2006.
676. Frei, R., Chladek, P., Trc, T., Kopecny, Z., Kautzner, J. Arthroscopic evaluation of
ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging for diagnosis of rotator cuff tear. Ortop
Traumatol Rehabil; Mar-Apr 2008.
677. Furukawa, R., Morihara, T., Arai, Y., Ito, H., Kida, Y., Sukenari, T., Horii, M., Ikoma, K.,
Fujiwara, H., Kubo, T. Diagnostic accuracy of magnetic resonance imaging for subscapularis
tendon tears using radial-slice magnetic resonance images. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Nov 2014.
678. Hitachi, S., Takase, K., Tanaka, M., Tojo, Y., Tabata, S., Majima, K., Higano, S., Takahashi,
S. High-resolution magnetic resonance imaging of rotator cuff tears using a microscopy coil:
noninvasive detection without intraarticular contrast material. Jpn J Radiol; Aug 2011.
679. Hodler, J., Kursunoglu-Brahme, S., Snyder, S. J., Cervilla, V., Karzel, R. P., Schweitzer, M.
E., Flannigan, B. D., Resnick, D. Rotator cuff disease: assessment with MR arthrography versus
standard MR imaging in 36 patients with arthroscopic confirmation. Radiology; Feb 1992.
680. Honda, H., Morihara, T., Arai, Y., Horii, M., Ito, H., Furukawa, R., Kida, Y., Sukenari, T.,
Ikoma, K., Oda, R., Yamada, Y., Fujiwara, H., Kubo, T. Clinical application of radial magnetic
resonance imaging for evaluation of rotator cuff tear. Orthop Traumatol Surg Res; Oct 2015.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

732

681. Huang, T., Liu, J., Ma, Y., Zhou, D., Chen, L., Liu, F. Diagnostic accuracy of MRA and MRI
for the bursal-sided partial-thickness rotator cuff tears: a meta-analysis. J Orthop Surg Res;
Dec 12 2019.
682. Iannotti, J. P., Zlatkin, M. B., Esterhai, J. L., Kressel, H. Y., Dalinka, M. K., Spindler, K. P.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the shoulder. Sensitivity, specificity, and predictive value. J
Bone Joint Surg Am; Jan 1991.
683. Jain, N. B., Collins, J., Newman, J. S., Katz, J. N., Losina, E., Higgins, L. D. Reliability of
magnetic resonance imaging assessment of rotator cuff: the ROW study. Pm r; Mar 2015.
684. Kelly, A. M., Fessell, D. Ultrasound compared with magnetic resonance imaging for the
diagnosis of rotator cuff tears: a critically appraised topic. Semin Roentgenol; Jul 2009.
685. Kim, H. J., Park, J. S., Kim, J. Y., Kee, Y. M., Rhee, Y. G. Interstitial tears of the rotator cuff:
difficulty in preoperative diagnosis. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Mar 2018.
686. Krief, O. P., Huguet, D. Shoulder pain and disability: comparison with MR findings. AJR
Am J Roentgenol; May 2006.
687. Lenza, M., Buchbinder, R., Takwoingi, Y., Johnston, R. V., Hanchard, N. C., Faloppa, F.
Magnetic resonance imaging, magnetic resonance arthrography and ultrasonography for
assessing rotator cuff tears in people with shoulder pain for whom surgery is being
considered. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; Sep 24 2013.
688. Malavolta, E. A., Assuncao, J. H., Gracitelli, M. E. C., Yen, T. K., Bordalo-Rodrigues, M.,
Ferreira Neto, A. A. Accuracy of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for subscapularis tear: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of diagnostic studies. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg; May
2019.
689. Malavolta, E. A., Assuncao, J. H., Guglielmetti, C. L., de Souza, F. F., Gracitelli, M. E.,
Bordalo-Rodrigues, M., Ferreira Neto, A. A. Accuracy of preoperative MRI in the diagnosis of
subscapularis tears. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg; Oct 2016.
690. Mohtasib, R. S., Alzahrani, A. M., Asiri, Y. N., Rayes, Z. F., Alshaalan, M. A. Accuracy of
shoulder ultrasound examination for diagnosis of rotator cuff pathologies: a single-center
retrospective study. Ann Saudi Med; May-Jun 2019.
691. Morag, Y., Jacobson, J. A., Miller, B., De Maeseneer, M., Girish, G., Jamadar, D. MR
imaging of rotator cuff injury: what the clinician needs to know. Radiographics; Jul-Aug 2006.
692. Morrison, D. S., Ofstein, R. The use of magnetic resonance imaging in the diagnosis of
rotator cuff tears. Orthopedics; Jun 1990.
693. Murakami, A. M., Kompel, A. J., Engebretsen, L., Li, X., Forster, B. B., Crema, M. D.,
Hayashi, D., Jarraya, M., Roemer, F. W., Guermazi, A. The epidemiology of MRI detected
shoulder injuries in athletes participating in the Rio de Janeiro 2016 Summer Olympics. BMC
Musculoskelet Disord; Aug 17 2018.
694. Naqvi, G. A., Jadaan, M., Harrington, P. Accuracy of ultrasonography and magnetic
resonance imaging for detection of full thickness rotator cuff tears. Int J Shoulder Surg; Oct
2009.
695. Reynolds, A. Imaging the injured shoulder. Radiol Technol; Jan-Feb 2012.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

733

696. Roy, J. S., Braen, C., Leblond, J., Desmeules, F., Dionne, C. E., MacDermid, J. C., Bureau,
N. J., Fremont, P. Diagnostic accuracy of ultrasonography, MRI and MR arthrography in the
characterisation of rotator cuff disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Sports
Med; Oct 2015.
697. Rutten, M. J., Spaargaren, G. J., van Loon, T., de Waal Malefijt, M. C., Kiemeney, L. A.,
Jager, G. J. Detection of rotator cuff tears: the value of MRI following ultrasound. Eur Radiol;
Feb 2010.
698. Sershon, R. A., Mather, R. C., Sherman, S. L., McGill, K. C., Romeo, A. A., Verma, N. N. Low
accuracy of interpretation of rotator cuff MRI in patients with osteoarthritis. Acta Orthop; Oct
2013.
699. Smith, T. O., Daniell, H., Geere, J. A., Toms, A. P., Hing, C. B. The diagnostic accuracy of
MRI for the detection of partial- and full-thickness rotator cuff tears in adults. Magn Reson
Imaging; Apr 2012.
700. Tirman, P. F., Steinbach, L. S., Belzer, J. P., Bost, F. W. A practical approach to imaging of
the shoulder with emphasis on MR imaging. Orthop Clin North Am; Oct 1997.
701. Vasishta, A., Kelkar, A., Joshi, P., Hapse, R. The value of sonoelastography in the diagnosis
of supraspinatus tendinopathy-a comparison study. Br J Radiol; Mar 2019.
702. Villafane, J. H., Valdes, K., Anselmi, F., Pirali, C., Negrini, S. The diagnostic accuracy of five
tests for diagnosing partial-thickness tears of the supraspinatus tendon: A cohort study. J
Hand Ther; Jul-Sep 2015.
703. Vinson, E. N., Wittstein, J., Garrigues, G. E., Taylor, D. C. MRI of selected abnormalities at
the anterior superior aspect of the shoulder: potential pitfalls and subtle diagnoses. AJR Am J
Roentgenol; Sep 2012.
704. Zlatkin, M. B., Falchook, F. S. Magnetic resonance pathology of the rotator cuff. Top
Magn Reson Imaging; Spring 1994.
705. Hunter, J. C., Blatz, D. J., Escobedo, E. M. SLAP lesions of the glenoid labrum: CT
arthrographic and arthroscopic correlation. Radiology; Aug 1992.
706. Palmer, W. E. MR arthrography of the rotator cuff and labral-ligamentous complex.
Semin Ultrasound CT MR; Aug 1997.
707. Peh, W. C. Magnetic resonance arthrography of the labral-ligamentous complex of the
shoulder: an update. Ann Acad Med Singapore; Sep 2002.
708. Waldt, S., Burkart, A., Lange, P., Imhoff, A. B., Rummeny, E. J., Woertler, K. Diagnostic
performance of MR arthrography in the assessment of superior labral anteroposterior lesions
of the shoulder. AJR American Journal Of Roentgenology; May 2004.
709. Jee, W. H., McCauley, T. R., Katz, L. D., Matheny, J. M., Ruwe, P. A., Daigneault, J. P.
Superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) lesions of the glenoid labrum: reliability and accuracy
of MR arthrography for diagnosis. Radiology; Jan 2001.
710. Lin, E. Magnetic resonance arthrography of superior labrum anterior-posterior lesions: a
practical approach to interpretation. Curr Prob Diagn Radiol; 2009.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

734

711. Bencardino, J. T., Beltran, J., Rosenberg, Z. S., Rokito, A., Schmahmann, S., Mota, J.,
Mellado, J. M., Zuckerman, J., Cuomo, F., Rose, D. Superior labrum anterior-posterior lesions:
diagnosis with MR arthrography of the shoulder. Radiology; Jan 2000.
712. Monu, J. U., Pope, T. L. MR diagnosis of superior labral anterior posterior (SLAP) injuries
of the glenoid labrum: value of routine imaging without intraarticular injection of contrast
material. Am J Roentgenology; 1994.
713. Zubler, Christoph, Mengiardi, Bernard, Schmid, Marius R, Hodler, Juerg, Jost, Bernhard,
Pfirrmann, Christian WA. MR arthrography in calcific tendinitis of the shoulder: diagnostic
performance and pitfalls. European radiology; 2007.
714. Ball, Craig M. Arthroscopic rotator cuff repair: magnetic resonance arthrogram
assessment of tendon healing. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2019.
715. Ianotti, J. P. Review: relocation and anterior release tests diagnose shoulder instability in
selected patients. J Bone Joint Surg Am; May 2005.
716. Moosikasuwan, J. B., Miller, T. T., Burke, B. J. Rotator cuff tears: clinical, radiographic,
and US findings. Radiographics; Nov-Dec 2005.
717. Crass, J. R., Craig, E. V., Feinberg, S. B. Ultrasonography of rotator cuff tears: a review of
500 diagnostic studies. J Clin Ultrasound; Jun 1988.
718. Shahabpour, M., Kichouh, M., Laridon, E., Gielen, J. L., De Mey, J. The effectiveness of
diagnostic imaging methods for the assessment of soft tissue and articular disorders of the
shoulder and elbow. Eur J Radiol; Feb 2008.
719. Middleton, William D, Edelstein, Gerald, Reinus, WR, Melson, G Leland, Totty, William G,
Murphy, William A. Sonographic detection of rotator cuff tears. American journal of
roentgenology; 1985.
720. Anderson, Mark W, Brennan, Christopher, Mittal, Amit. Imaging evaluation of the rotator
cuff. Clinics in sports medicine; 2012.
721. McCreesh, Karen M, Anjum, Shakeel, Crotty, James M, Lewis, Jeremy S. Ultrasound
measures of supraspinatus tendon thickness and acromiohumeral distance in rotator cuff
tendinopathy are reliable. Journal of clinical ultrasound; 2016.
722. Al-faham, Z., Jolepalem, P. Use of SPECT/CT with 99mTc-MDP Bone Scintigraphy to
Diagnose Symptomatic Os Acromiale. J Nucl Med Technol; Sep 2015.
723. Park, J. Y., Park, S. G., Keum, J. S., Oh, J. H., Park, J. S. The diagnosis and prognosis of
impingement syndrome in the shoulder with using quantitative SPECT assessment: a
prospective study of 73 patients and 24 volunteers. Clin Orthop Surg; Dec 2009.
724. Thelu-Vanysacker, M., Frederic, P., Charles-Edouard, T., Alban, B., Nicolas, B., Tanguy, B.
SPECT/CT in Postoperative Shoulder Pain. Semin Nucl Med; Sep 2018.
725. Henckaerts, L., Gheysens, O., Vanderschueren, S., Goffin, K., Blockmans, D. Use of 18 ffluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography in the diagnosis of polymyalgia
rheumatica — A prospective study of 99 patients. Rheumatology (United Kingdom); 2018.
726. Moon, Y. L., Lee, S. H., Park, S. Y., Yu, J. C., Gorthi, V. Evaluation of shoulder disorders by
2-[F-18]-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography and computed
tomography. Clinics in orthopedic surgery; 2010.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

735

727. Shinozaki, N., Sano, H., Omi, R., Kishimoto, K. N., Yamamoto, N., Tashiro, M., Itoi, E.
Differences in muscle activities during shoulder elevation in patients with symptomatic and
asymptomatic rotator cuff tears: analysis by positron emission tomography. J Shoulder Elbow
Surg; Mar 2014.
728. Blanchard, T. K., Constant, C. R., Bearcroft, P. W., Marshall, T. J., Dixon, A. K. Imaging of
the rotator cuff: an arthrographic pitfall. Eur Radiol; 1998.
729. Boudreau, Nicolas, Gaudreault, Nathaly, Roy, Jean-Sébastien, Bédard, Sonia, Balg,
Frédéric. The Addition of Glenohumeral Adductor Coactivation to a Rotator Cuff Exercise
Program for Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy: A Single-Blind Randomized Controlled Trial. journal
of orthopaedic &amp; sports physical therapy; 2019.
730. Ager, Amanda L, Roy, Jean-Sébastien, Gamache, France, Hébert, Luc J. The effectiveness
of an upper extremity neuromuscular training program on the shoulder function of military
members with a rotator cuff tendinopathy: a pilot randomized controlled trial. Military
medicine; 2019.
731. Bron, C., Wensing, M., Franssen, J. L., Oostendorp, R. A. Treatment of myofascial trigger
points in common shoulder disorders by physical therapy: a randomized controlled trial
[ISRCTN75722066]. BMC Musculoskelet Disord; 2007.
732. Green, S, Buchbinder, R, Hetrick, SE. Physiotherapy interventions for shoulder pain.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews; 2003.
733. Ingwersen, Kim Gordon, Jensen, Steen Lund, Sørensen, Lilli, Jørgensen, Hans Ri,
Christensen, Robin, Søgaard, Karen, Juul-Kristensen, Birgit. Three months of progressive highload versus traditional low-load strength training among patients with rotator cuff
tendinopathy: primary results from the double-blind randomized controlled RoCTEx Trial.
Orthopaedic Journal of Sports Medicine; 2017.
734. Littlewood, Chris, Malliaras, Peter, Mawson, Sue, May, Stephen, Walters, Stephen J. Selfmanaged loaded exercise versus usual physiotherapy treatment for rotator cuff
tendinopathy: a pilot randomised controlled trial. Physiotherapy; 2014.
735. Moosmayer, Stefan, Lund, Gerty, Seljom, Unni S, Haldorsen, Benjamin, Svege, Ida C,
Hennig, Toril, Pripp, Are H, Smith, Hans-Jørgen. At a 10-year follow-up, tendon repair is
superior to physiotherapy in the treatment of small and medium-sized rotator cuff tears. JBJS;
2019.
736. Rhon, Daniel I, Boyles, Robert B, Cleland, Joshua A. One-year outcome of subacromial
corticosteroid injection compared with manual physical therapy for the management of the
unilateral shoulder impingement syndrome: a pragmatic randomized trial. Annals of internal
medicine; 2014.
737. Gleyze, P.,et al. Comparison and critical evaluation of rehabilitation and home-based
exercises for treating shoulder stiffness: Prospective, multicenter study with 148 cases.
Orthopaedics &amp; Traumatology: Surgery &amp; Research; 2011.
738. Karagülle, M.,S. Kardeş,and M. Z. Karagülle. Real-life effectiveness of spa therapy in
rheumatic and musculoskeletal diseases: a retrospective study of 819 patients. International
journal of biometeorology; 2017.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

736

739. Koç, Cihan, Kurt, Emine Eda, Koçak, Fatmanur Aybala, Erdem, Hatice Rana, Konar, Naime
Meriç. Does balneotherapy provide additive effects to physical therapy in patients with
subacute supraspinatus tendinopathy? A randomized, controlled, single-blind study.
International Journal of Biometeorology; 2021.
740. Özkuk, K. and Z. Ateş. Balneotherapy in the Treatment of Chronic Shoulder Pain: A
Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial. Alternative Therapies in Health &amp; Medicine; 2020.
741. Pille, V.,et al. Work-related musculoskeletal symptoms in industrial workers and the
effect of balneotherapy. 2009.
742. Tefner, Ildikó Katalin, Kovács, Csaba, Gaál, Ramóna, Koroknai, András, Horváth, Remény,
Badruddin, Rakib Mohammed, Borbély, Ildikó, Nagy, Katalin, Bender, Tamás. The effect of
balneotherapy on chronic shoulder pain. A randomized, controlled, single-blind follow-up
trial. A pilot study. Clinical rheumatology; 2015.
743. Verhagen, A. P.,et al. Balneotherapy and quality assessment: interobserver reliability of
the Maastricht criteria list and the need for blinded quality assessment. Journal of clinical
epidemiology; 1998.
744. Bervoets, Diederik C, Luijsterburg, Pim AJ, Alessie, Jeroen JN, Buijs, Martijn J, Verhagen,
Arianne P. Massage therapy has short-term benefits for people with common musculoskeletal
disorders compared to no treatment: a systematic review. Journal of physiotherapy; 2015.
745. van den Dolder, P. A., Roberts, D. L. A trial into the effectiveness of soft tissue massage
in the treatment of shoulder pain. Aust J Physiother; 2003.
746. van den Dolder, P. A.,P. H. Ferreira,and K. M. Effectiveness of Soft Tissue Massage for
Nonspecific Shoulder Pain: Randomized Controlled Trial. Phys Ther; 2015.
747. Ernst, Edzard. Is reflexology an effective intervention? A systematic review of
randomised controlled trials. Medical Journal of Australia; 2009.
748. Ernst, Edzard, Köder, Kerstin. An overview of reflexology. The European Journal of
General Practice; 1997.
749. Soliman, AYMAN S, Mahmoud, AYMAN M, Serry, ZM, Dawood, FADY G. Therapeutic
effects of low-level laser and reflexology on adhesive capsulitis in elderly type 2 diabetic
patients. Asian J Pharm Clin Res; 2014.
750. Nabeta, T., Kawakita, K. Relief of chronic neck and shoulder pain by manual acupuncture
to tender points--a sham-controlled randomized trial. Complement Ther Med; Dec 2002.
751. de Hoyos, Juan Antonio Guerra, Martín, Maria del Carmen Andrés, Lopez, Miguel Vigára,
López, Teresa Molina, Morilla, Francisco Antonio Verdugo, Moreno, Maria José González.
Randomised trial of long term effect of acupuncture for shoulder pain. Pain; 2004.
752. Kleinhenz, J., Streitberger, K., Windeler, J., Gussbacher, A., Mavridis, G., Martin, E.
Randomised clinical trial comparing the effects of acupuncture and a newly designed placebo
needle in rotator cuff tendinitis. Pain; Nov 1999.
753. Kong, J. C., Lee, M. S., Shin, B. C. Randomized clinical trials on acupuncture in korean
literature: a systematic review. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med; Mar 2009.
754. Vas, J., Ortega, C., Olmo, V., Perez-Fernandez, F., Hernandez, L., Medina, I., Seminario, J.
M., Herrera, A., Luna, F., Perea-Milla, E., Mendez, C., Madrazo, F., Jimenez, C., Ruiz, M. A.,
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

737

Aguilar, I. Single-point acupuncture and physiotherapy for the treatment of painful shoulder:
a multicentre randomized controlled trial. Rheumatology (Oxford); Jun 2008.
755. Green, S., Buchbinder, R., Hetrick, S. Acupuncture for shoulder pain. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev; 2005.
756. Grant, H. J., Arthur, A., Pichora, D. R. Evaluation of interventions for rotator cuff
pathology: a systematic review. J Hand Ther; Apr-Jun 2004.
757. Baldry, P. Superficial versus deep dry needling. Acupunct Med; Aug 2002.
758. Choi, S., Kim, K. H. Acupuncture for symptomatic rotator cuff disease: Protocol for a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Medicine (United States); 2020.
759. Koh, P. S., Seo, B. K., Cho, N. S., Park, H. S., Park, D. S., Baek, Y. H. Clinical effectiveness
of bee venom acupuncture and physiotherapy in the treatment of adhesive capsulitis: a
randomized controlled trial. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Aug 2013.
760. Lee, Sook-Hyun, Lim, Sung Min. Acupuncture for Poststroke Shoulder Pain: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis. Evidence-based Complementary &amp; Alternative Medicine
(eCAM); 2016.
761. Nielsen, A., Wieland, L. S. Cochrane reviews on acupuncture therapy for pain: A snapshot
of the current evidence. Explore; 2019.
762. Park, Y., Sung, W., Goo, B., Seo, B., Yeom, S., Baek, Y. The effectiveness and safety of
thread-embedding acupuncture for chronic rotator cuff disease: A study protocol for a
randomized, patient-assessor-blinded, controlled, clinical trial. European Journal of
Integrative Medicine; 2019.
763. Yu-Ri, Seo, Woo-Sang, Jung, Seong-Uk, Park, Sang-Kwan, Moon, Jung-Mi, Park, JooYoung, Park. The Effect of Ouhyul Herbal Acupuncture Point Injections on Shoulder Pain after
Stroke. Evidence-based Complementary &amp; Alternative Medicine (eCAM); 2013.
764. Bang, M. D., Deyle, G. D. Comparison of supervised exercise with and without manual
physical therapy for patients with shoulder impingement syndrome. J Orthop Sports Phys
Ther; Mar 2000.
765. Green, S., Buchbinder, R, Hetrick, S. Physiotherapy interventions for shoulder pain.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2006.
766. Teys, P., Bisset, L., Vicenzino, B. The initial effects of a Mulligan&#x27;s mobilization with
movement technique on range of movement and pressure pain threshold in pain-limited
shoulders. Man Ther; Feb 2008.
767. Trampas, A., Kitsios, A. Exercise and manual therapy for the treatment of impingement
syndrome of the shoulder: a systematic review. Physical Therapy Reviews; 2006.
768. Ho, C. Y., Sole, G., Munn, J. The effectiveness of manual therapy in the management of
musculoskeletal disorders of the shoulder: a systematic review. Man Ther; Oct 2009.
769. Desmeules, F., Cote, C. H., Fremont, P. Therapeutic exercise and orthopedic manual
therapy for impingement syndrome: a systematic review. Clin J Sport Med; May 2003.
770. Senbursa, G., Baltaci, G., Atay, A. Comparison of conservative treatment with and
without manual physical therapy for patients with shoulder impingement syndrome: a
prospective, randomized clinical trial. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc; Jul 2007.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

738

771. Citaker, S, Taskiran, H, Akdur, H, Arabaci, UO, Ekici, G. Comparison of the mobilization
and proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation methods in the treatment of shoulder
impingement sydrome. Pain Clin; 2005.
772. Conroy, D. E., Hayes, K. W. The effect of joint mobilization as a component of
comprehensive treatment for primary shoulder impingement syndrome. J Orthop Sports Phys
Ther; Jul 1998.
773. Bergman, G. J., Winters, J. C., Groenier, K. H., Pool, J. J., Meyboom-de Jong, B., Postema,
K., van der Heijden, G. J. Manipulative therapy in addition to usual medical care for patients
with shoulder dysfunction and pain: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med; Sep 21
2004.
774. Boyles, R. E., Ritland, B. M., Miracle, B. M., Barclay, D. M., Faul, M. S., Moore, J. H.,
Koppenhaver, S. L., Wainner, R. S. The short-term effects of thoracic spine thrust manipulation
on patients with shoulder impingement syndrome. Manual Therapy; 08 2009.
775. Strunce, J. B., Walker, M. J., Boyles, R. E., Young, B. A. The immediate effects of thoracic
spine and rib manipulation on subjects with primary complaints of shoulder pain. J Man
Manip Ther; 2009.
776. Mintken, P. E., Cleland, J. A., Carpenter, K. J., Bieniek, M. L., Keirns, M., Whitman, J. M.
Some factors predict successful short-term outcomes in individuals with shoulder pain
receiving cervicothoracic manipulation: a single-arm trial. Phys Ther; Jan 2010.
777. Kim, Y. -S.,et al. Is early passive motion exercise necessary after arthroscopic rotator cuff
repair?. The American journal of sports medicine; 2012.
778. De, P. R.,et al. Passive mobilization after arthroscopic rotator cuff repair is not
detrimental in the early postoperative period. Acta Orthopaedica Belgica; 2015.
779. Gomes, Cafp, Dibai-Filho, A. V., Politti, F., Gonzalez, T. O., Biasotto-Gonzalez, D. A.
Combined Use of Diadynamic Currents and Manual Therapy on Myofascial Trigger Points in
Patients With Shoulder Impingement Syndrome: A Randomized Controlled Trial. J
Manipulative Physiol Ther; Jul-Aug 2018.
780. Pragassame, S Arul, Kurup, VK Mohandas. Efficacy of limited treatment frequency of
Mulligan&#x27;s mobilization with movement for frozen shoulder. Indian Journal of
Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy; 2014.
781. Aytar, Aydan, Baltaci, Gul, Uhl, Tim, Tuzun, Handan, Oztop, Pinar, Karatas, Metin. The
effects of scapular mobilization in patients with subacromial impingement syndrome: a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Journal of sport rehabilitation;
2015.
782. Beaudreuil, J,et al. Effect of dynamic humeral centring (DHC) treatment on painful active
elevation of the arm in subacromial impingement syndrome. Secondary analysis of data from
an RCT. Br J Sports Med; 2015.
783. Beaudreuil, J,et al. Assessment of dynamic humeral centering in shoulder pain with
impingement syndrome: a randomised clinical trial. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases; 2011.
784. Bizzarri, Paolo, Buzzatti, Luca, Cattrysse, Erik, Scafoglieri, Aldo. Thoracic manual therapy
is not more effective than placebo thoracic manual therapy in patients with shoulder

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

739

dysfunctions: A systematic review with meta-analysis. Musculoskeletal Science and Practice;
2018.
785. Bury, Julie, West, Morgan, Chamorro-Moriana, Gema, Littlewood, Chris. Effectiveness of
scapula-focused approaches in patients with rotator cuff related shoulder pain: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Manual therapy; 2016.
786. Camarinos, James, Marinko, Lee. Effectiveness of manual physical therapy for painful
shoulder conditions: a systematic review. Journal of Manual &amp; Manipulative Therapy;
2009.
787. Cook, C,et al. The addition of cervical unilateral posterior–anterior mobilisation in the
treatment of patients with shoulder impingement syndrome: a randomised clinical trial.
Manual Therapy; 2014.
788. de Paula Gomes, CAF,et al. Combined use of diadynamic currents and manual therapy
on myofascial trigger points in patients with shoulder impingement syndrome: a randomized
controlled trial. Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics; 2018.
789. Delgado-Gil, JA,et al. Effects of mobilization with movement on pain and range of motion
in patients with unilateral shoulder impingement syndrome: a randomized controlled trial.
Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics; 2015.
790. Gebremariam, L., Hay, E. M., van der Sande, R., Rinkel, W. D., Koes, B. W., Huisstede, B.
M. Subacromial impingement syndrome--effectiveness of physiotherapy and manual therapy.
Br J Sports Med; Aug 2014.
791. Haik, Melina N, Alburquerque-Sendín, Francisco, Camargo, Paula R. Short-term effects
of thoracic spine manipulation on shoulder impingement syndrome: a randomized controlled
trial. Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation; 2017.
792. Haik, MN,et al. Scapular kinematics pre–and post–thoracic thrust manipulation in
individuals with and without shoulder impingement symptoms: a randomized controlled stud.
Journal of Orthopaedic &amp; Sports Physical Therapy; 2014.
793. Hauswirth J, et al. Immediate effects of cervical unilateral anterior-posterior mobilisation
on shoulder pain and impairment in post-operative arthroscopy patients. Journal of Back and
Musculoskeletal Rehabilitation; 2017.
794. Kachingwe, AF,et al. Comparison of manual therapy techniques with therapeutic exercise
in the treatment of shoulder impingement: a randomized controlled pilot clinical trial. Journal
of Manual and Manipulative Therapy; 2008.
795. Kardouni, Joseph. Effects of Thoracic Spinal Manipulative Therapy on Thoracic Spine and
Shoulder Kinematics, Thoracic Spine Flexion/Extension Excursion, and Pressure Pain
Sensitivity in Patients with Subacromial Pain Syndrome. 2013.
796. Kardouni, JR,et al. Thoracic spine manipulation in individuals with subacromial
impingement syndrome does not immediately alter thoracic spine kinematics, thoracic
excursion, or scapular kinematics: a randomized controlled trial. Journal of Orthopaedic
&amp; Sports Physical Therapy; 2015.
797. Kardouni, JR,et al. Immediate changes in pressure pain sensitivity after thoracic spinal
manipulative therapy in patients with subacromial impingement syndrome: a randomized
controlled study. Manual Therapy; 2015.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

740

798. Keener, Jay D, Galatz, Leesa M, Stobbs-Cucchi, Georgia, Patton, Rebecca, Yamaguchi,
Ken. Rehabilitation following arthroscopic rotator cuff repair: a prospective randomized trial
of immobilization compared with early motion. JBJS; 2014.
799. Kromer, TO,de Bie,RA,Bastiaenen,CH. Effectiveness of physiotherapy and costs in
patients with clinical signs of shoulder impingement syndrome: One-year follow-up of a
randomized controlled trial. Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine,; 2014.
800. Land, Helen, Gordon, Susan, Watt, Kerrianne. Effect of manual physiotherapy in
homogeneous individuals with subacromial shoulder impingement: A randomized controlled
trial. Physiotherapy Research International; 2019.
801. Li, S,et al. The clinical effect of rehabilitation following arthroscopic rotator cuff repair: A
meta-analysis of early versus delayed passive motion. Medicine; 2018.
802. Menek, B,Tarakci,D,Algun,ZC. The effect of Mulligan mobilization on pain and life quality
of patients with Rotator cuff syndrome: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Back and
Musculoskeletal Rehabilitation; 2019.
803. Michener LA, et al. Validation of a sham comparator for thoracic spinal manipulation in
patients with shoulder pain. Manual Therapy; 2015.
804. Muth, Stephanie, Barbe, Mary F, Lauer, Richard, McClure, Philip. The effects of thoracic
spine manipulation in subjects with signs of rotator cuff tendinopathy. journal of orthopaedic
&amp; sports physical therapy; 2012.
805. Riley, SP,et al. Thoracic spinal manipulation for musculoskeletal shoulder pain: Can an
instructional set change patient expectation and outcome?. Manual Therapy; 2015.
806. Riley, SP,et al. Short-term effects of thoracic spinal manipulations and message conveyed
by clinicians to patients with musculoskeletal shoulder symptoms: a randomized clinical trial.
Journal of Manual &amp; Manipulative Therapy; 2015.
807. Satpute, KH,Bhandari,P,and Hall,T. Efficacy of hand behind back mobilization with
movement for acute shoulder pain and movement impairment: a randomized controlled trial.
Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics; 2015.
808. Şenbursa, G,Baltaci,G,Atay,ÖA. The effectiveness of manual therapy in supraspinatus
tendinopathy. Acta Orthopaedica et Traumatologica Turcica; 2011.
809. Sheps, D,et al. Early mobilisation following mini-open rotator cuff repair: a randomised
control trial. The Bone and Joint Journal; 2015.
810. Steuri, Ruedi, Sattelmayer, Martin, Elsig, Simone, Kolly, Chloé, Tal, Amir, Taeymans, Jan,
Hilfiker, Roger. Effectiveness of conservative interventions including exercise, manual therapy
and medical management in adults with shoulder impingement: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of RCTs. Br J Sports Med; 2017.
811. Surenkok, O,Aytar,A,Baltaci G. Acute effects of scapular mobilization in shoulder
dysfunction: a double-blind randomized placebo-controlled trial. Journal of Sport
Rehabilitation; 2009.
812. Teys, P,et al. One-week time course of the effects of Mulligan&#x27;s Mobilisation with
Movement and taping in painful shoulders. Manual Therapy; 2013.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

741

813. van Rensburg, KJ,Atkins,E. Does thoracic manipulation increase shoulder range of
movement in patients with subacromial impingement syndrome? A pilot study. International
Musculoskeletal Medicine; 2012.
814. Witt, Dexter W, Talbott, Nancy R. The effect of shoulder position on inferior
glenohumeral mobilization. Journal of Hand Therapy; 2018.
815. Wright AA, et al. Subacute effects of cervicothoracic spinal thrust/non-thrust in addition
to shoulder manual therapy plus exercise intervention in individuals with subacromial
impingement syndrome: a prospective, randomized controlled clinical trial pilot study.
Journal of Manual &amp; Manipulative Therapy; 2017.
816. Page, Matthew J, Green, Sally, McBain, Brodwen, Surace, Stephen J, Deitch, Jessica,
Lyttle, Nicolette, Mrocki, Marshall A, Buchbinder, Rachelle. Manual therapy and exercise for
rotator cuff disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews; 2016.
817. Garofalo, R., Conti, M., Notarnicola, A., Maradei, L., Giardella, A., Castagna, A. Effects of
one-month continuous passive motion after arthroscopic rotator cuff repair: results at 1-year
follow-up of a prospective randomized study. Musculoskelet Surg; May 2010.
818. Kuhn, J. E., Dunn, W. R., Sanders, R., An, Q., Baumgarten, K. M., Bishop, J. Y., Brophy, R.
H., Carey, J. L., Holloway, B. G., Jones, G. L., Ma, C. B., Marx, R. G., McCarty, E. C., Poddar, S.
K., Smith, M. V., Spencer, E. E., Vidal, A. F., Wolf, B. R., Wright, R. W., Group, Moon,Shoulder.
Effectiveness of physical therapy in treating atraumatic full-thickness rotator cuff tears: a
multicenter prospective cohort study. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Oct 2013.
819. Lee, B. G., Cho, N. S., Rhee, Y. G. Effect of two rehabilitation protocols on range of motion
and healing rates after arthroscopic rotator cuff repair: aggressive versus limited early passive
exercises. Arthroscopy; Jan 2012.
820. Seida, J. C., LeBlanc, C., Schouten, J. R., Mousavi, S. S., Hartling, L., Vandermeer, B.,
Tjosvold, L., Sheps, D. M. Systematic review: nonoperative and operative treatments for
rotator cuff tears. Ann Intern Med; Aug 17 2010.
821. Nejati, P.,et al. Treatment of subacromial impingement syndrome: platelet-rich plasma
or exercise therapy? A randomized controlled trial. Orthopaedic journal of sports medicine;
2017.
822. Bennell, K.,et al. Efficacy of standardised manual therapy and home exercise programme
for chronic rotator cuff disease: randomised placebo controlled trial. BMJ; 2010.
823. Thomson, S, Jukes, C, Lewis, J. Rehabilitation following surgical repair of the rotator cuff:
a systematic review. Physiotherapy; 2016.
824. Grana, W. A. Physical agents in musculoskeletal problems: heat and cold therapy
modalities. Instr Course Lect; 1993.
825. Michlovitz, SL. Thermal agents in rehabilitation. 1996.
826. Melzack, R., Jeans, M. E., Stratford, J. G., Monks, R. C. Ice massage and transcutaneous
electrical stimulation: comparison of treatment for low-back pain. Pain; Oct 1980.
827. Nadler, S. F. Nonpharmacologic management of pain. J Am Osteopath Assoc; Nov 2004.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

742

828. Parle, Phillip J, Riddiford-Harland, Diane L, Howitt, Chris D, Lewis, Jeremy S. Acute rotator
cuff tendinopathy: does ice, low load isometric exercise, or a combination of the two produce
an analgaesic effect?. British Journal of Sports Medicine; 2017.
829. Saito, N., Horiuchi, H., Kobayashi, S., Nawata, M., Takaoka, K. Continuous local cooling
for pain relief following total hip arthroplasty. J Arthroplasty; Apr 2004.
830. Vasudevan, S. V. Physical rehabilitation in managing pain. Pain: Clinical Updates; 1997.
831. de Freitas, Diego Galace, Marcondes, Freddy Beretta, Monteiro, Renan Lima, Rosa,
Sabrina Gonçalves, Fucs, Patrícia Maria de Moraes Barros, Fukuda, Thiago Yukio. Pulsed
electromagnetic field and exercises in patients with shoulder impingement syndrome: a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Archives of physical medicine and
rehabilitation; 2014.
832. Akyol, Y., Ulus, Y., Durmus, D., Canturk, F., Bilgici, A., Kuru, O., Bek, Y. Effectiveness of
microwave diathermy on pain, functional capacity, muscle strength, quality of life, and
depression in patients with subacromial impingement syndrome: a randomized placebocontrolled clinical study. Rheumatol Int; Oct 2012.
833. Yilmaz Kaysin, M., Akpinar, P., Aktas, I., Unlü Ozkan, F., Silte Karamanlioglu, D., Cagliyan
Hartevioglu, H., Vural, N. Effectiveness of Shortwave Diathermy for Subacromial Impingement
Syndrome and Value of Night Pain for Patient Selection: A Double-Blinded, Randomized,
Placebo-Controlled Trial. Am J Phys Med Rehabil; Mar 2018.
834. Page, M. J.,et al. Electrotherapy modalities for rotator cuff disease. Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews; 2016.
835. Kim, G. -W.,et al. Effects of a Newly Developed Therapeutic Deep Heating Device Using
High Frequency in Patients with Shoulder Pain and Disability: A Pilot Study. Pain Research and
Management; 2019.
836. Smith, T. O., Back, T., Toms, A. P., Hing, C. B. Diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound for rotator
cuff tears in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Radiol; Nov 2011.
837. Robertson, V. J., Baker, K. G. A review of therapeutic ultrasound: effectiveness studies.
Phys Ther; Jul 2001.
838. Members, Philadelphia,Panel, Experts, Clinical,Specialty, Albright, John, Allman, Richard,
Bonfiglio, Richard Paul, Conill, Alicia, Dobkin, Bruce, Guccione, Andrew A, Hasson, Scott,
Russo, Randolph. Philadelphia Panel evidence-based clinical practice guidelines on selected
rehabilitation interventions for shoulder pain. Physical Therapy; 2001.
839. Berry, H., Fernandes, L., Bloom, B., Clark, R. J., Hamilton, E. B. Clinical study comparing
acupuncture, physiotherapy, injection and oral anti-inflammatory therapy in shoulder-cuff
lesions. Curr Med Res Opin; 1980.
840. Downing, D. S., Weinstein, A. Ultrasound therapy of subacromial bursitis. A double blind
trial. Phys Ther; Feb 1986.
841. van der Heijden, G. J., van der Windt, D. A., de Winter, A. F. Physiotherapy for patients
with soft tissue shoulder disorders: a systematic review of randomised clinical trials. BMJ; Jul
5 1997.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

743

842. Nykanen, M. Pulsed ultrasound treatment of the painful shoulder a randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled study. Scand J Rehabil Med; Jun 1995.
843. Van der Heijden, G. J., Leffers, P., Wolters, P. J., Verheijden, J. J., van Mameren, H.,
Houben, J. P., Bouter, L. M., Knipschild, P. G. No effect of bipolar interferential electrotherapy
and pulsed ultrasound for soft tissue shoulder disorders: a randomised controlled trial. Ann
Rheum Dis; Sep 1999.
844. Ebenbichler, G. R., Erdogmus, C. B., Resch, K. L., Funovics, M. A., Kainberger, F., Barisani,
G., Aringer, M., Nicolakis, P., Wiesinger, G. F., Baghestanian, M., Preisinger, E., Fialka-Moser,
V. Ultrasound therapy for calcific tendinitis of the shoulder. N Engl J Med; May 20 1999.
845. Cole, B. F.,et al. Ultrasound-Guided Versus Blind Subacromial Corticosteroid Injections
for Subacromial Impingement Syndrome. American Journal of Sports Medicine; 2016.
846. de Witte, P. B., Selten, J. W., Navas, A., Nagels, J., Visser, C. P., Nelissen, R. G., Reijnierse,
M. Calcific tendinitis of the rotator cuff: a randomized controlled trial of ultrasound-guided
needling and lavage versus subacromial corticosteroids. Am J Sports Med; Jul 2013.
847. Gatt, D. L., C. P., Charalambous. Ultrasound-guided barbotage for calcific tendonitis of
the shoulder: a systematic review including 908 patients. Arthroscopy: The Journal of
Arthroscopy &amp; Related Surgery; 2014.
848. Ottenheijm, R. P.,et al. Ultrasound-diagnosed disorders in shoulder patients in daily
general practice: A retrospective observational study. BMC Family Practice; 2014.
849. Rutten, M. J., Jager, G. J., Blickman, J. G. From the RSNA refresher courses: US of the
rotator cuff: pitfalls, limitations, and artifacts. Radiographics; 2006.
850. Ryu, K.,et al. Ultrasound-Guided Prolotherapy with Polydeoxyribonucleotide for Painful
Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy. Pain Res Manag; 2018.
851. Saraya, S., Bakry, R. El. Ultrasound: Can it replace MRI in the evaluation of the rotator
cuff tears?. Egyptian Journal of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine; 2016.
852. Wang, J. C.,et al. Ultrasound-Guided Standard vs Dual-Target Subacromial Corticosteroid
Injections for Shoulder Impingement Syndrome: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Arch Phys
Med Rehabil; 2019.
853. Zhang, T.,et al. Efficacy of ultrasound-guided percutaneous lavage for rotator cuff calcific
tendinopathy: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore); 2019.
854. Zheng, F.,et al. Role of ultrasound in the detection of rotator-cuff syndrome: An
observational study. Medical Science Monitor; 2019.
855. Pieber, K.,et al. Long-term course of shoulders after ultrasound therapy for calcific
tendinitis: Results of the 10-year follow-up of a randomized controlled trial. American journal
of physical medicine &amp; rehabilitation; 2018.
856. Shomoto, K.,et al. Effects of ultrasound therapy on calcificated tendinitis of the shoulder.
2002; Journal of the Japanese Physical Therapy Association.
857. Fitz-Ritson, D. Lasers and their therapeutic applications in chiropractic. J Can Chropr
Assoc; 2001.
858. Bal, A., Eksioglu, E., Gurcay, E., Gulec, B., Karaahmet, O., Cakci, A. Low-level laser therapy
in subacromial impingement syndrome. Photomed Laser Surg; Feb 2009.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

744

859. Santamato, A., Solfrizzi, V., Panza, F., Tondi, G., Frisardi, V., Leggin, B. G., Ranieri, M.,
Fiore, P. Short-term effects of high-intensity laser therapy versus ultrasound therapy in the
treatment of people with subacromial impingement syndrome: a randomized clinical trial.
Phys Ther; Jul 2009.
860. England, S., Farrell, A. J., Coppock, J. S., Struthers, G., Bacon, P. A. Low power laser
therapy of shoulder tendonitis. Scand J Rheumatol; 1989.
861. Vecchio, P., Cave, M., King, V., Adebajo, A. O., Smith, M., Hazleman, B. L. A double-blind
study of the effectiveness of low level laser treatment of rotator cuff tendinitis. Br J
Rheumatol; Aug 1993.
862. Tumilty, S., Munn, J., McDonough, S., Hurley, D. A., Basford, J. R., Baxter, G. D. Low level
laser treatment of tendinopathy: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Photomed Laser
Surg; Feb 2010.
863. Abrisham, S. M., Kermani-Alghoraishi, M., Ghahramani, R., Jabbari, L., Jomeh, H., Zare,
M. Additive effects of low-level laser therapy with exercise on subacromial syndrome: a
randomised, double-blind, controlled trial. Clin Rheumatol; Oct 2011.
864. Dogan, S. K., Ay, S., Evcik, D. The effectiveness of low laser therapy in subacromial
impingement syndrome: a randomized placebo controlled double-blind prospective study.
Clinics (Sao Paulo); 2010.
865. Elsodany, Ahmed Mohamed, Alayat, Mohamed Salaheldien Mohamed, Ali, Mohamed
Mohamed Ebrahim, Khaprani, Hussien Mosa. Long-term effect of pulsed Nd: YAG laser in the
treatment of patients with rotator cuff tendinopathy: a randomized controlled trial.
Photomedicine and laser surgery; 2018.
866. Haslerud, Sturla, Magnussen, Liv Heide, Joensen, Jon, Lopes‐Martins, Rodrigo Alvaro
Brandao, Bjordal, Jan Magnus. The efficacy of low‐level laser therapy for shoulder
tendinopathy: a systematic review and meta‐analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Physiotherapy Research International; 2015.
867. Kelle, Bayram, Kozanoglu, Erkan. Low-level laser and local corticosteroid injection in the
treatment of subacromial impingement syndrome: a controlled clinical trial. Clinical
rehabilitation; 2014.
868. Otadi, Khadijeh, Hadian, Mohammad-Reza, Olyaei, GholamReza, Jalaie, Shohre. The
beneficial effects of adding low level laser to ultrasound and exercise in Iranian women with
shoulder tendonitis: A randomized clinical trial 1. Journal of back and musculoskeletal
rehabilitation; 2012.
869. Vidhyadhari, BSL, Mishra, Priyadarshini, Madhavi, K, Nageswararao, MM. Qualitative
Analysis of Postural Variations in Adolescent Girls. Website: www. ijpot. com; 2016.
870. Yavuz, Ferdi, Duman, Iltekin, Taskaynatan, Mehmet Ali, Tan, Arif Kenan. Low-level laser
therapy versus ultrasound therapy in the treatment of subacromial impingement syndrome:
a randomized clinical trial. Journal of back and musculoskeletal rehabilitation; 2014.
871. Brox, J. I. Regional musculoskeletal conditions: shoulder pain. Best Pract Res Clin
Rheumatol; Feb 2003.
872. Abdul-Hadi, O.,et al. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in orthopaedics. J Bone Joint
Surg Am; 2009.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

745

873. AlRuthia, Yazed, Alghadeer, Sultan, Balkhi, Bander, Almalag, Haya M, Alsobayel, Hana,
Alodaibi, Faris, Alayoubi, Fakhr, Alkhamali, Amal S, Alshuwairikh, Samar, Alqahtani, Futoun N.
Efficacy of acetaminophen versus ibuprofen for the management of rotator cuff-related
shoulder pain: Randomized open-label study. Saudi Pharmaceutical Journal; 2019.
874. Amroodi, Morteza Nakhaei, Salariyeh, Mostafa. Predictors of failure after conservative
treatment of symptomatic partial-thickness rotator cuff tear. Journal of shoulder and elbow
surgery; 2020.
875. Baring, Toby, Emery, Roger, Reilly, Peter. Management of rotator cuff disease: specific
treatment for specific disorders. Best Practice &amp; Research Clinical Rheumatology; 2007.
876. Baring, T, Khan, W, Emery, R. Rotator cuff disease: a review of pathophysiology and
treatment. International Journal of Medical and Biological Frontiers; 2011.
877. Blomquist, Jesper, Solheim, Erik, Liavaag, Sigurd, Baste, V, Havelin, LI. Do nonsteroidal
anti‐inflammatory drugs affect the outcome of arthroscopic B ankart repair?. Scandinavian
journal of medicine &amp; science in sports; 2014.
878. Boudreault, Jennifer, Desmeules, François, Roy, Jean-Sebastien, Dionne, Clermont,
Frémont, Pierre, MacDermid, Joy C. The efficacy of oral non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
for rotator cuff tendinopathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of rehabilitation
medicine; 2014.
879. Cho, Chul-Hyun, Song, Kwang-Soon, Min, Byung-Woo, Lee, Kyung-Jae, Ha, Eunyoung,
Lee, Yong-Chul, Lee, Young-Kuk. Multimodal approach to postoperative pain control in
patients undergoing rotator cuff repair. Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy;
2011.
880. Cohen, David B, Kawamura, Sumito, Ehteshami, John R, Rodeo, Scott A. Indomethacin
and celecoxib impair rotator cuff tendon-to-bone healing. The American journal of sports
medicine; 2006.
881. Devereaux, Moira, Velanoski, Kinny Quan, Pennings, Amanda, Elmaraghy, Amr. Shortterm effectiveness of precut kinesiology tape versus an NSAID as adjuvant treatment to
exercise for subacromial impingement: A randomized controlled trial. Clinical Journal of Sport
Medicine; 2016.
882. Inderhaug, Eivind, Kollevold, Kristin H, Kalsvik, Maiken, Hegna, Janne, Solheim, Eirik.
Preoperative NSAIDs, non-acute onset and long-standing symptoms predict inferior outcome
at long-term follow-up after rotator cuff repair. Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology,
Arthroscopy; 2017.
883. Lim, Joel Wei-An, Liow, Ming Han, Tan, Andrew Hwee Chye. Post-operative non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs do not affect clinical outcomes of rotator cuff repair. Journal of
Orthopaedics; 2020.
884. Lin, Meng-Ting, Chiang, Ching-Fang, Wu, Chueh-Hung, Huang, Yi-Ting, Tu, Yu-Kang,
Wang, Tyng-Guey. Comparative effectiveness of injection therapies in rotator cuff
tendinopathy: a systematic review, pairwise and network meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation; 2019.
885. Nazligul, Tuba, Akpinar, Pinar, Aktas, Ilknur, Unlu, F Ozkan, Cagliyan, H Hartevioglu. The
effect of interferential current therapy on patients with subacromial impingement syndrome:

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

746

a randomized, double-blind, sham-controlled study. European journal of physical and
rehabilitation medicine; 2018.
886. Oh, Joo Han, Seo, Hyuk Jun, Lee, Ye-Hyun, Choi, Hye-Yeon, Joung, Ho Yun, Kim, Sae Hoon.
Do selective COX-2 inhibitors affect pain control and healing after arthroscopic rotator cuff
repair? A preliminary study. The American journal of sports medicine; 2018.
887. Pérez-Merino, L, Casajuana, MC, Bernal, G, Faba, J, Astilleros, AE, González, R, Giralt, M,
Romeu, M, Nogués, MR. Evaluation of the effectiveness of three physiotherapeutic
treatments for subacromial impingement syndrome: a randomised clinical trial.
Physiotherapy; 2016.
888. Petri, Michelle, Hufman, Stephen L, Waser, Gregory, Cui, Harry, Snabes, Michael C,
Verburg, Kenneth M. Celecoxib effectively treats patients with acute shoulder
tendinitis/bursitis. The Journal of rheumatology; 2004.
889. Pipanmekaporn, Tanyong, Punjasawadwong, Yodying, Charuluxananan, Somrat,
Lapisatepun, Worawut, Bunburaphong, Pavena, Boonsri, Settapong, Tantraworasin, Apichat,
Bunchungmongkol, Nutchanart. The effectiveness of intravenous parecoxib on the incidence
of ipsilateral shoulder pain after thoracotomy: A randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled trial. Journal of cardiothoracic and vascular anesthesia; 2018.
890. Sun, Yaying, Chen, Jiwu, Li, Hong, Jiang, Jia, Chen, Shiyi. Steroid injection and
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents for shoulder pain: a PRISMA systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Medicine; 2015.
891. Toma, O, Persoons, B, Pogatzki‐Zahn, E, Van de Velde, M, Joshi, GP, collaborators,
PROSPECT,Working,Group, Schug, S, Kehlet, H, Bonnet, F, Rawal, N. PROSPECT guideline for
rotator cuff repair surgery: systematic review and procedure‐specific postoperative pain
management recommendations. Anaesthesia; 2019.
892. van der Sande, Renske, Rinkel, Willem D, Gebremariam, Lukas, Hay, Elaine M, Koes, Bart
W, Huisstede, Bionka M. Subacromial impingement syndrome: effectiveness of
pharmaceutical interventions–nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, corticosteroid, or other
injections: a systematic review. Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation; 2013.
893. Xu, Jianda, Qu, Yuxing, Li, Huan, Jiang, Tao, Zheng, Chong, Wang, Bin, Shen, Pengfei.
Effect of ketorolac in intra-articular injection analgesia for postoperative pain in patients
undergoing shoulder arthroscopy: a pilot-controlled clinical study. Journal of pain research;
2019.
894. Zheng, Xiao-Qing, Li, Ke, Wei, You-Dong, Tie, Hong-Tao, Yi, Xiao-Yan, Huang, Wei.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs versus corticosteroid for treatment of shoulder pain: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation; 2014.
895. Wiffen, P., Collins, S., McQuay, H., Carroll, D., Jadad, A., Moore, A. Anticonvulsant drugs
for acute and chronic pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2005.
896. Challapalli, V., Tremont-Lukats, I. W., McNicol, E. D., Lau, J., Carr, D. B. Systemic
administration of local anesthetic agents to relieve neuropathic pain. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev; 2005.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

747

897. Bang, Si Ra, Yu, Su Kyung, Kim, Tae Hyeong. Can gabapentin help reduce postoperative
pain in arthroscopic rotator cuff repair? A prospective, randomized, double-blind study.
Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery; 2010.
898. Abbruzzese, G. The medical management of spasticity. Eur J Neurol; 2002.
899. Elenbaas, J. K. Centrally acting oral skeletal muscle relaxants. Am J Hosp Pharm; Oct 1980.
900. Cherkin, D. C. Primary care research on low back pain. The state of the science. Spine;
Sep 15 1998.
901. Di Iorio, D., Henley, E., Doughty, A. A survey of primary care physician practice patterns
and adherence to acute low back problem guidelines. Arch Fam Med; Nov-Dec 2000.
902. van Tulder, M. W., Koes, B. W., Bouter, L. M. Conservative treatment of acute and chronic
nonspecific low back pain. A systematic review of randomized controlled trials of the most
common interventions. Spine (Phila Pa 1976); Sep 15 1997.
903. Schnitzer, T. J., Ferraro, A., Hunsche, E., Kong, S. X. A comprehensive review of clinical
trials on the efficacy and safety of drugs for the treatment of low back pain. J Pain Symptom
Manage; Jul 2004.
904. Deyo, R. A., Loeser, J. D., Bigos, S. J. Herniated lumbar intervertebral disk. Ann Intern
Med; Apr 15 1990.
905. Baratta, R. R. A double-blind comparative study of carisoprodol, propoxyphene, and
placebo in the management of low back syndrome. Curr Ther Res Clin Exp; Sep 1976.
906. Arbus, L, Fajadet, B, Aubert, D,et al. Activity of tetrazepam (myolastan) in low back pain:
a double-blind trial v. placebo. Clin Trials J; 1990.
907. Preston, EJ, Miller, CB, Herbertson, RK. A double-blind, multicenter trial of
methocarbamol (Robaxin®) and cyclobenzaprine (Flexeril®) in acute musculoskeletal
conditions. Today’s Therapeutic Trends; 1984.
908. Chou, R., K., Peterson, M., Helfand. Comparative efficacy and safety of skeletal muscle
relaxants for spasticity and musculoskeletal conditions: a systematic review. Journal of pain
and symptom management; 2004.
909. See, S., R., Ginzburg. Skeletal muscle relaxants. Pharmacotherapy: The Journal of Human
Pharmacology and Drug Therapy; 2008.
910. Bloom, J. E.,et al. Image-guided versus blind glucocorticoid injection for shoulder pain.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews; 2012.
911. Dean, B. J. F.,et al. The risks and benefits of glucocorticoid treatment for tendinopathy:
A systematic review of the effects of local glucocorticoid on tendon. Seminars in Arthritis
&amp; Rheumatism; 2014.
912. Cumpston, M., Johnston, R. V., Wengier, L., Buchbinder, R. Topical glyceryl trinitrate for
rotator cuff disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2009.
913. Ritchie, L. D. A clinical evaluation of flurbiprofen LAT and piroxicam gel: a multicentre
study in general practice. Clin Rheumatol; May 1996.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

748

914. Lin, J., Zhang, W., Jones, A., Doherty, M. Efficacy of topical non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs in the treatment of osteoarthritis: meta-analysis of randomised
controlled trials. BMJ; Aug 7 2004.
915. Oltean, H.,et al. Herbal medicine for low‐back pain. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews; 2014.
916. Mason, Lorna, Moore, R Andrew, Edwards, Jayne E, Derry, Sheena, McQuay, Henry J.
Topical NSAIDs for chronic musculoskeletal pain: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC
musculoskeletal disorders; 2004.
917. Derry, Sheena, Conaghan, Philip, Da Silva, Jose Antonio P, Wiffen, Philip J, Moore, R
Andrew. Topical NSAIDs for chronic musculoskeletal pain in adults. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews; 2016.
918. Challoumas, D., Kirwan, P. D., Borysov, D., Clifford, C., McLean, M., Millar, N. L. Topical
glyceryl trinitrate for the treatment of tendinopathies: a systematic review. Br J Sports Med;
Feb 2019.
919. Paoloni, J. A., Appleyard, R. C., Nelson, J., Murrell, G. A. Topical glyceryl trinitrate
application in the treatment of chronic supraspinatus tendinopathy: a randomized, doubleblinded, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Am J Sports Med; Jun 2005.
920. Gammaitoni, A. R.,et al. Predicting response to subacromial injections and
lidocaine/tetracaine patch from pretreatment pain quality in patients with shoulder
impingement syndrome. Pain Medicine; 2015.
921. Jensen, M. P.,et al. The pain quality response profile of a corticosteroid injections and
heated lidocaine/tetracaine patch in the treatment of shoulder impingement syndrome. The
Clinical journal of pain; 2015.
922. Marriott, T. B., M. R., Charney, S., Stanworth. Effects of application durations and heat
on the pharmacokinetic properties of drug delivered by a lidocaine/tetracaine patch: a
randomized, open-label, controlled study in healthy volunteers. Clinical therapeutics; 2012.
923. Radnovich, R. Heated lidocaine-tetracaine patch for management of shoulder
impingement syndrome. Journal of the American Osteopathic Association; 2013.
924. Radnovich, R., MarriottT. B. . Utility of the heated lidocaine/tetracaine patch in the
treatment of pain associated with shoulder impingement syndrome: a pilot study.
International journal of general medicine; 2013.
925. Radnovich, R., J., Trudeau, A. R., Gammaitoni. A randomized clinical study of the heated
lidocaine/tetracaine patch versus subacromial corticosteroid injection for the treatment of
pain associated with shoulder impingement syndrome. Journal of pain research; 2014.
926. Wallace, M. S.,et al. Evaluation of the depth and duration of anesthesia from heated
lidocaine/tetracaine (Synera) patches compared with placebo patches applied to healthy
adult volunteers. Regional Anesthesia &amp; Pain Medicine; 2010.
927. Kim, J. E.,et al. Analgesic effect of trigger point injection and EMLA for shoulder pain in
patients undergoing total laparoscopic hysterectomy: A randomized controlled study.
Medicine; 2019.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

749

928. Berrazueta, J. R., Losada, A., Poveda, J., Ochoteco, A., Riestra, A., Salas, E., Amado, J. A.
Successful treatment of shoulder pain syndrome due to supraspinatus tendinitis with
transdermal nitroglycerin. A double blind study. Pain; Jul 1996.
929. Gumina, S.,et al. Arginine L-alpha-ketoglutarate, methylsulfonylmethane, hydrolyzed
type I collagen and bromelain in rotator cuff tear repair: a prospective randomized study. Curr
Med Res Opin; 2012.
930. Percy, E. C., J. D., Carson. The use of DMSO in tennis elbow and rotator cuff tendonitis: a
double-blind study. Med Sci Sports Exerc; 1981.
931. Hudek, R.,et al. Degenerative rotator cuff tears are associated with a low Omega-3 Index.
Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids; 2019.
932. Lewis, JS, Sandford, FM. Rotator cuff tendinopathy: is there a role for polyunsaturated
Fatty acids and antioxidants?. Journal of Hand Therapy; 200*.
933. Sandford, F. M., Sanders, T. A., Wilson, H., Lewis, J. S. A randomised controlled trial of
long-chain omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in the management of rotator cuff related
shoulder pain. BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med; 2018.
934. Cancienne, Jourdan M, Brockmeier, Stephen F, Rodeo, Scott A, Werner, Brian C.
Perioperative serum lipid status and statin use affect the revision surgery rate after
arthroscopic rotator cuff repair. The American journal of sports medicine; 2017.
935. Garcia, Grant H, Liu, Joseph N, Wong, Alexandra, Cordasco, Frank, Dines, David M, Dines,
Joshua S, Gulotta, Lawrence V, Warren, Russell. Hyperlipidemia increases the risk of retear
after arthroscopic rotator cuff repair. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2017.
936. Zeng, Gerald Joseph ShengXiang, Lee, Merrill Jian Hui, Chen, Jerry Yongqiang, Ang,
Benjamin Fu Hong, Hao, Ying, Lie, Denny Tjiauw Tjoen. Dyslipidemia With Perioperative Statin
Usage Is Not Associated With Poorer 24-Month Functional Outcomes After Arthroscopic
Rotator Cuff Surgery. The American Journal of Sports Medicine; 2020.
937. Conti, M, Garofalo, R, Castagna, A. Does a brace influence clinical outcomes after
arthroscopic rotator cuff repair?. Musculoskeletal surgery; 2015.
938. Ghandour, Tarek Mohamed, Ibrahim, Amr, Abdelrahman, Amr A, Elgammal, Ahmed,
Hammad, Mohamed Hassan. Does the type of shoulder brace affect postoperative pain and
clinical outcome after arthroscopic rotator cuff repair?. Arthroscopy: The Journal of
Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery; 2019.
939. Hollman, Freek, Wolterbeek, Nienke, Zijl, Jacco AC, van Egeraat, Sjoerd PM, Wessel,
Ronald N. Abduction brace versus antirotation sling after arthroscopic cuff repair: the effects
on pain and function. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery; 2017.
940. Ibrahim, Mahmoud I, Johnson, Aaron J, Pivec, Robert, Issa, Kimona, Naziri, Qais, Kapadia,
Bhaveen V, Mont, Michael A. Treatment of adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder with a static
progressive stretch device: a prospective, randomized study. Journal of long-term effects of
medical implants; 2012.
941. Jenssen, Kjersti Kaul, Lundgreen, Kirsten, Madsen, Jan Erik, Kvakestad, Rune, Pripp, Are
Hugo, Dimmen, Sigbjørn. No functional difference between three and six weeks of
immobilization after arthroscopic rotator cuff repair: A prospective randomized controlled
non-inferiority trial. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery; 2018.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

750

942. Rached, Roberto Abi, Rampim, Danielle Bianchini, Yamauti, Rafael Hossamu, Azeka,
Meyre Sato, dos Santos, Renata Moraes, Guidolin, Beatriz, Otani, Pericles Tey, Oliveira,
Ricardo Bocatto, Castineira, Carolina Pastorin, Martins, Fernanda. Rotator cuff syndrome:
Rehabilitation. Acta Fisiátrica; 2013.
943. Sheps, David M, Silveira, Anelise, Beaupre, Lauren, Styles-Tripp, Fiona, Balyk, Robert,
Lalani, Aleem, Glasgow, Robert, Bergman, Joseph, Bouliane, Martin. Early active motion
versus sling immobilization after arthroscopic rotator cuff repair: A randomized controlled
trial. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery; 2019.
944. Tirefort, Jérome, Schwitzguebel, Adrien J, Collin, Philippe, Nowak, Alexandra, PlombHolmes, Chantal, Lädermann, Alexandre. Postoperative Mobilization After Superior Rotator
Cuff Repair: Sling versus No-sling. A Randomized Controlled Trial: Sling versus no-sling after
RCR. Orthopaedic Journal of Sports Medicine; 2019.
945. Ziegler, Patrick, Stuby, Fabian, Küper, Markus Alexander, Greschner, Thomas, Stöckle,
Ulrich, Gühring, Markus. Postoperative Outcome of a New Shoulder Orthesis after
Arthroscopic Rotator Cuff Repair: a Prospective, Randomized Observational Study. Zeitschrift
für Orthopädie und Unfallchirurgie; 2019.
946. Arndt, J, Clavert, P, Mielcarek, P, Bouchaib, J, Meyer, N, Kempf, J-F, Shoulder,
French,Society,for, Elbow. Immediate passive motion versus immobilization after endoscopic
supraspinatus tendon repair: a prospective randomized study. Orthopaedics &amp;
Traumatology: Surgery &amp; Research; 2012.
947. Baumgarten, Keith M, Osborn, Roy, Schweinle III, Will E, Zens, Matthew J. The position
of sling immobilization influences the outcomes of anatomic total shoulder arthroplasty: a
randomized, single-blind, prospective study. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2018.
948. Hsu, Jason E, Horneff, John G, Gee, Albert O. Immobilization after rotator cuff repair:
what evidence do we have now?. Orthopedic Clinics; 2016.
949. Riboh, Jonathan C, Garrigues, Grant E. Early passive motion versus immobilization after
arthroscopic rotator cuff repair. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic &amp; Related
Surgery; 2014.
950. Shen, Chong, Tang, Zhi-Hong, Hu, Jun-Zu, Zou, Guo-Yao, Xiao, Rong-Chi, Yan, Dong-Xue.
Does immobilization after arthroscopic rotator cuff repair increase tendon healing? A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Archives of orthopaedic and trauma surgery; 2014.
951. van der Meijden, Olivier A, Westgard, Paul, Chandler, Zachary, Gaskill, Trevor R,
Kokmeyer, Dirk, Millett, Peter J. Rehabilitation after arthroscopic rotator cuff repair: current
concepts review and evidence-based guidelines. International journal of sports physical
therapy; 2012.
952. Yoo, Jae Chul, Park, Won Hah, Koh, Kyoung Hwan, Kim, Sang Min. Arthroscopic treatment
of chronic calcific tendinitis with complete removal and rotator cuff tendon repair. Knee
Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy; 2010.
953. Copping, J., O'Driscoll, M. Application of tape at the shoulder joint: an effective
therapeutic modality for the treatment of impingement syndrome?. Physical Therapy
Reviews; 2005.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

751

954. Alexander, C. M., Harrison, P. J. Reflex connections from forearm and hand afferents to
shoulder girdle muscles in humans. Exp Brain Res; Feb 2003.
955. Lewis, J. S., Wright, C., Green, A. Subacromial impingement syndrome: the effect of
changing posture on shoulder range of movement. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther; Feb 2005.
956. Ackermann, B, Adams, R, Marshall, E. The effect of scapula taping on electromyographic
activity and musical performance in professional violinists. Australian Journal of
Physiotherapy; 2001.
957. Thelen, M. D., Dauber, J. A., Stoneman, P. D. The clinical efficacy of kinesio tape for
shoulder pain: a randomized, double-blinded, clinical trial. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther; Jul 2008.
958. Kaya, E., Zinnuroglu, M., Tugcu, I. Kinesio taping compared to physical therapy modalities
for the treatment of shoulder impingement syndrome. Clin Rheumatol; Apr 30 2010.
959. Zanella, P.., Willey, S.., Seibel, S.., Hughes, C, . The effect of scapular taping on shoulder
joint repositioning. Journal of Sport Rehabilitation; 2001.
960. Pogliaghi, S. A new taping technique for shoulder impingement. A pilot study. Europa
Medicophysica; 1998.
961. Cools, A. M., Witvrouw, E. E., Danneels, L. A., Cambier, D. C. Does taping influence
electromyographic muscle activity in the scapular rotators in healthy shoulders?. Man Ther;
Aug 2002.
962. Baquie, P. Upper limb taping. Aust Fam Physician; Apr 2002.
963. Host, H. H. Scapular taping in the treatment of anterior shoulder impingement. Phys
Ther; Sep 1995.
964. Smith, M., Sparkes, V., Busse, M., Enright, S. Upper and lower trapezius muscle activity
in subjects with subacromial impingement symptoms: is there imbalance and can taping
change it?. Phys Ther Sport; May 2009.
965. Hsu, Y. H., Chen, W. Y., Lin, H. C., Wang, W. T., Shih, Y. F. The effects of taping on scapular
kinematics and muscle performance in baseball players with shoulder impingement
syndrome. J Electromyogr Kinesiol; Dec 2009.
966. Miller, P., Osmotherly, P. Does scapula taping facilitate recovery for shoulder
impingement symptoms? A pilot randomized controlled trial. J Man Manip Ther; 2009.
967. Hadala, M., Barrios, C. Different strategies for sports injury prevention in an
America&#x27;s Cup yachting crew. Med Sci Sports Exerc; Aug 2009.
968. Patel, Manish A, Gadsden, Jeffrey C, Nedeljkovic, Srdjan S, Bao, Xiaodong, Zeballos, Jose
L, Yu, Vincent, Ayad, Sabry S, Bendtsen, Thomas F. Brachial plexus block with liposomal
bupivacaine for shoulder surgery improves analgesia and reduces opioid consumption: results
from a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, controlled trial. Pain Medicine; 2020.
969. Walsh, S. F. Treatment of a brachial plexus injury using kinesiotape and exercise.
Physiother Theory Pract; Oct 2010.
970. Yoshida, A., Kahanov, L. The effect of kinesio taping on lower trunk range of motions. Res
Sports Med; Apr-Jun 2007.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

752

971. Kalichman, L., Vered, E., Volchek, L. Relieving symptoms of meralgia paresthetica using
Kinesio taping: a pilot study. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Jul 2010.
972. Lin, VW, Hsiao, I, Kingery, WS. High intensity magnetic stimulation over the lumbosacral
spine evokes antinociception in rats. Clin Neurophysiol; 2002.
973. Binder, A, Parr, G., Hazleman, B, Fitton-Jackson, S. Pulsed electromagnetic field therapy
of persistent rotator cuff tendinitis. A double-blind controlled assessment. Lancet; 1984.
974. de Freitas, D Galace, Monteiro, Renan Lima, Marcondes, Freddy Beretta, Fukuda, Thiago
Yukio, Fucs, Patrícia Maria de Moraes Barros. Pulsed electromagnetic field in patients with
shoulder impingement syndrome. J Applied Res; 2013.
975. Klüter, Tim, Krath, André, Stukenberg, Martin, Gollwitzer, Hans, Harrasser, Norbert,
Knobloch, Karsten, Maffulli, Nicola, Hausdorf, Jörg, Gerdesmeyer, Ludger. Electromagnetic
transduction therapy and shockwave therapy in 86 patients with rotator cuff tendinopathy: A
prospective randomized controlled trial. Electromagnetic Biology and Medicine; 2018.
976. Osti, L, Buono, Del, Maffulli, AN. Pulsed electromagnetic fields after rotator cuff repair:
a randomized, controlled study. Orthopedics; 2015.
977. Dalbøge, A.,et al. Cumulative occupational shoulder exposures and surgery for
subacromial impingement syndrome: a nationwide Danish cohort study. Occupational and
environmental medicine; 2014.
978. Hand, J., Verscheure, S., Osternig, L. A comparison of whole-body vibration and
resistance training on total work in the rotator cuff. J Athl Train; Sep-Oct 2009.
979. Joseph, L.,et al. Prevalence of musculoskeletal pain among professional drivers: A
systematic review. Journal of occupational health; 2020.
980. Kuppens, K.,et al. Sensory processing and central pain modulation in patients with
chronic shoulder pain: A case‐control study. Scandinavian journal of medicine &amp; science
in sports; 2018.
981. Lam, P. H., Hansen, K., Keighley, G., Hackett, L., Murrell, G. A. A Randomized, DoubleBlinded, Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial Evaluating the Effectiveness of Daily Vibration After
Arthroscopic Rotator Cuff Repair. Am J Sports Med; Nov 2015.
982. Huisstede, B. M., Koes, B. W., Gebremariam, L., Keijsers, E., Verhaar, J. A. Current
evidence for effectiveness of interventions to treat rotator cuff tears. Man Ther; Jun 2011.
983. Hexter, A. T., Pendegrass, C., Haddad, F., Blunn, G. Demineralized Bone Matrix to
Augment Tendon-Bone Healing: A Systematic Review. Orthop J Sports Med; Oct 2017.
984. Perlick, L., Luring, C., Bathis, H., Perlick, C., Kraft, C., Diedrich, O. Efficacy of extracorporal
shock-wave treatment for calcific tendinitis of the shoulder: experimental and clinical results.
J Orthop Sci; 2003.
985. Mouzopoulos, G., Stamatakos, M., Mouzopoulos, D., Tzurbakis, M. Extracorporeal shock
wave treatment for shoulder calcific tendonitis: a systematic review. Skeletal Radiol; Sep
2007.
986. Rompe, J. D., Burger, R., Hopf, C., Eysel, P. Shoulder function after extracorporal shock
wave therapy for calcific tendinitis. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Sep-Oct 1998.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

753

987. Rompe, J. D., Zoellner, J., Nafe, B. Shock wave therapy versus conventional surgery in the
treatment of calcifying tendinitis of the shoulder. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Jun 2001.
988. Sems, A., Dimeff, R., Iannotti, J. P. Extracorporeal shock wave therapy in the treatment
of chronic tendinopathies. J Am Acad Orthop Surg; Apr 2006.
989. Chung, B., Wiley, J. P. Extracorporeal shockwave therapy: a review. Sports Med; 2002.
990. Loew, M., Daecke, W., Kusnierczak, D., Rahmanzadeh, M., Ewerbeck, V. Shock-wave
therapy is effective for chronic calcifying tendinitis of the shoulder. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Sep
1999.
991. Cosentino, R., De Stefano, R., Selvi, E., Frati, E., Manca, S., Frediani, B., Marcolongo, R.
Extracorporeal shock wave therapy for chronic calcific tendinitis of the shoulder: single blind
study. Ann Rheum Dis; Mar 2003.
992. Ioppolo, F., Tattoli, M., Di Sante, L., Venditto, T., Tognolo, L., Delicata, M., Rizzo, R. S., Di
Tanna, G., Santilli, V. Clinical improvement and resorption of calcifications in calcific tendinitis
of the shoulder after shock wave therapy at 6 months&#x27; follow-up: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Sep 2013.
993. Frassanito, P.,et al. Effectiveness of Extracorporeal Shock Wave Therapy and kinesio
taping in calcific tendinopathy of the shoulder: a randomized controlled trial. European
journal of physical and rehabilitation medicine; 2018.
994. Albert, J. D., Meadeb, J., Guggenbuhl, P., Marin, F., Benkalfate, T., Thomazeau, H., Chales,
G. High-energy extracorporeal shock-wave therapy for calcifying tendinitis of the rotator cuff:
a randomised trial. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Mar 2007.
995. Brañes, J.,et al. Shoulder rotator cuff responses to extracorporeal shockwave therapy:
morphological and immunohistochemical analysis. Shoulder &amp; Elbow; 2012.
996. Carlisi, E.,et al. Focused extracorporeal shock wave therapy combined with supervised
eccentric training for supraspinatus calcific tendinopathy. European journal of physical and
rehabilitation medicine; 2018.
997. Carulli C, et al. Effectiveness of extracorporeal shockwave therapy in three major tendon
diseases. Journal of Orthopaedics and Traumatology; 2016.
998. Chou, W.,et al. Prognostic factors for the outcome of extracorporeal shockwave therapy
for calcific tendinitis of the shoulder. The bone &amp; joint journal; 2017.
999. Chou W-Y, et al. Comparative outcomes of extracorporeal shockwave therapy for
shoulder tendinitis or partial tears of the rotator cuff in athletes and non-athletes:
Retrospective study. International Journal of Surgery; 2018.
1000. Engebretsen, K., Grotle, M., Bautz-Holter, E., Ekeberg, O. M., Juel, N. G., Brox, J. I.
Supervised exercises compared with radial extracorporeal shock-wave therapy for
subacromial shoulder pain: 1-year results of a single-blind randomized controlled trial. Phys
Ther; Jan 2011.
1001. Farr S, et al. Extracorporeal shockwave therapy in calcifying tendinitis of the shoulder.
Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy; 2011.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

754

1002. Frizziero A, et al. Extracorporeal shockwaves therapy versus hyaluronic acid injection
for the treatment of painful non-calcific rotator cuff tendinopathies: preliminary results. The
Journal of sports medicine and physical fitness; 2017.
1003. Kvalvaag, E. One year results of a randomized controlled trial on radial Extracorporeal
Shock Wave Treatment, with predictors of pain, disability and return to work in patients with
subacromial pain syndrome. European journal of physical and rehabilitation medicine; 2017.
1004. Kvalvaag, E.,et al. Effectiveness of radial extracorporeal shock wave therapy (rESWT)
when combined with supervised exercises in patients with subacromial shoulder pain: a
double-masked, randomized, sham-controlled trial. American journal of sports medicine;
2017.
1005. Lorbach O, et al. Influence of deposit stage and failed ESWT on the surgical results of
arthroscopic treatment of calcifying tendonitis of the shoulder. Knee Surgery, Sports
Traumatology, Arthroscopy; 2008.
1006. Malliaropoulos N, et al. Individualised radial extracorporeal shock wave therapy
(rESWT) for symptomatic calcific shoulder tendinopathy: a retrospective clinical study. BMC
musculoskeletal disorders; 2017.
1007. Moretti B, et al. Medium-energy shock wave therapy in the treatment of rotator cuff
calcifying tendinitis. Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy; 2005.
1008. Ramon S, et al. Is hyaluronic injection really better than shockwave treatment for
painful non-calcified rotator cuff tendinopathies? Think again…. The Journal of sports
medicine and physical fitness; 2018.
1009. Rebuzzi E, et al. Arthroscopy surgery versus shock wave therapy for chronic calcifying
tendinitis of the shoulder. Journal of Orthopaedics and Traumatology; 2008.
1010. Santamato A, et al. Is extracorporeal shockwave therapy combined with isokinetic
exercise more effective than extracorporeal shockwave therapy alone for subacromial
impingement syndrome? A randomized clinical trial. Journal of Orthopaedic &amp;amp;
Sports Physical Therapy; 2016.
1011. Speed, C. Extracorporeal shock-wave therapy in the management of chronic soft-tissue
conditions. Journal of bone and joint surgery. British volume; 2004.
1012. Surace SJ, et al. Shock wave therapy for rotator cuff disease with or without
calcification. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews; 2020.
1013. Wijayanti I, et al. Comparing the effectiveness of medium-and high-dose extracorporeal
shockwave therapy against calcific tendonitis of the rotator cuff. Journal of Physics:
Conference Series; 2018.
1014. Wu K-T, et al. Efficacy of Extracorporeal Shockwave Therapy on Calcified and
Noncalcified Shoulder Tendinosis: A Propensity Score Matched Analysis. BioMed research
international; 2019.
1015. Aktas I, Akgun K,Cakmak B. Therapeutic effect of pulsed electromagnetic field in
conservative treatment of subacromial impingement syndrome. Clin Rheumato; 2007.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

755

1016. Chard, M. D. Hazleman,B. L. Devereaux,M. D. Controlled study to investigate doseresponse patterns to portable pulsed electromagnetic field in the treatment of rotator cuff
tendinitis. Journal of Orthopaedic Rheumatology; 1988.
1017. Gebremariam L, Hay EM,van der Sande R,Rinkel WD,Koes BW,Huisstede BM.
Subacromial impingement syndrome--effectiveness of physiotherapy and manual therapy. Br
J Sports Med; 2014.
1018. Haik MN, et al. Effectiveness of physical therapy treatment of clearly defined
subacromial pain: a systematic review of randomised controlled trials. Br J Sports Med; 2016.
1019. Osti L, Del Buono A,Maffulli N,Denaro V. Early efficacy of pulsed electromagnetic fields
in the management of rotator cuff tear a randomized controlled trial. Muscles, Ligaments
&amp; Tendons Journal; 2012.
1020. Reinold MM, et al. The effect of neuromuscular electrical stimulation of the
infraspinatus on shoulder external rotation force production after rotator cuff repair surger.
American journal of sports medicine; 2008.
1021. Atya, A. M. Efficacy of microcurrent electrical stimulation on pain, proprioception
accuracy and functional disability in subacromial impingement: RCT. Physiotherapy and
Occupational Therapy; 2012.
1022. Vrouva, S.,et al. Comparative study of pain relief in two non-pharmacological
treatments in patients with partial rotator cuff tears: A randomized trial. Anesthesiology and
Pain Medicine; 2019.
1023. García, I.,et al. Comparative effectiveness of ultrasonophoresis and iontophoresis in
impingement syndrome: a double-blind, randomized, placebo controlled trial. Clinical
rehabilitation; 2016.
1024. Leduc, B. E.,et al. Treatment of calcifying tendinitis of the shoulder by acetic acid
iontophoresis: a double-blind randomized controlled trial. Archives of physical medicine and
rehabilitation; 2003.
1025. Blum, K., Chen, A. L., Chen, T. J., Waite, R. L., Downs, B. W., Braverman, E. R., Kerner,
M. M., Savarimuthu, S. M., DiNubile, N. Repetitive H-wave device stimulation and program
induces significant increases in the range of motion of post operative rotator cuff
reconstruction in a double-blinded randomized placebo controlled human study. BMC
Musculoskelet Disord; 2009.
1026. McDowell, B. C.,et al. Comparative analgesic effects of H-wave therapy and
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation on pain threshold in humans. Archives of physical
medicine and rehabilitation; 1999.
1027. Ahmad, E. T. High-voltage pulsed galvanic stimulation: effect of treatment duration on
healing of chronic pressure ulcers. Annals of burns and fire disasters; 2008.
1028. Kaya, D.,et al. High voltage pulsed galvanic stimulation adjunct to rehabilitation
program for patellofemoral pain syndrome: a prospective randomized controlled trial. Turk J
Physiother Rehabil; 2013.
1029. El-sayed, A. G.,et al. Percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation: an alternative to TENS
in the management of sciatica. Pain; 1999.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

756

1030. Hamza, M. A.,et al. Percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation: a novel analgesic therapy
for diabetic neuropathic pain. Diabetes care; 2000.
1031. Weiner, D. K.,et al. Efficacy of percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation for the
treatment of chronic low back pain in older adults. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society;
2003.
1032. Adebajo, A. O., Nash, P., Hazleman, B. L. A prospective double blind dummy placebo
controlled study comparing triamcinolone hexacetonide injection with oral diclofenac 50 mg
TDS in patients with rotator cuff tendinitis. J Rheumatol; Sep 1990.
1033. Petri, M., Dobrow, R., Neiman, R., Whiting-O'Keefe, Q., Seaman, W. E. Randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled study of the treatment of the painful shoulder. Arthritis
Rheum; Sep 1987.
1034. Park, J. H., Lee, Y. S., Wang, J. H., Noh, H. K., Kim, J. G. Outcome of the isolated SLAP
lesions and analysis of the results according to the injury mechanisms. Knee Surg Sports
Traumatol Arthrosc; May 2008.
1035. Buchbinder, R., Green, S., Youd, J. M. Corticosteroid injections for shoulder pain.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2003.
1036. Goupille, P., Sibilia, J. Local corticosteroid injections in the treatment of rotator cuff
tendinitis (except for frozen shoulder and calcific tendinitis). Groupe Rhumatologique
Francais de l&#x27;Epaule (G. R. E. P.). Clin Exp Rheumatol; Sep-Oct 1996.
1037. Bell, Allen D, Conaway, Doug. Corticosteroid injections for painful shoulders.
International journal of clinical practice; 2005.
1038. van der Heijden, G. J., van der Windt, D. A., Kleijnen, J., Koes, B. W., Bouter, L. M. Steroid
injections for shoulder disorders: a systematic review of randomized clinical trials. Br J Gen
Pract; May 1996.
1039. Cacchio, A., De Blasis, E., Desiati, P., Spacca, G., Santilli, V., De Paulis, F. Effectiveness of
treatment of calcific tendinitis of the shoulder by disodium EDTA. Arthritis Rheum; Jan 15
2009.
1040. Chou, W. -Y.,et al. Effect of sodium hyaluronate treatment on rotator cuff lesions
without complete tears: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Journal of
shoulder and elbow surgery; 2010.
1041. Flores, C.,et al. Efficacy and tolerability of peritendinous hyaluronic acid in patients with
supraspinatus tendinopathy: a multicenter, randomized, controlled trial. Sports medicineopen; 2017.
1042. Penning, LI, de Bie, RA, Walenkamp, G. H. Subacromial triamcinolone acetonide,
hyaluronic acid and saline injections for shoulder pain an RCT investigating the effectiveness
in the first days. BMC musculoskeletal disorders; 2014.
1043. Saggini, R.,et al. Viscosupplementation with hyaluronic acid or polynucleotides: Results
and hypothesis for condro-synchronization. J Clin Trials; 2014.
1044. Kim, Y. S., Park, J. Y., Lee, C. S., Lee, S. J. Does hyaluronate injection work in shoulder
disease in early stage? A multicenter, randomized, single blind and open comparative clinical
study. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jun 2012.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

757

1045. Noël, E.,et al. Efficacy and safety of Hylan GF 20 in shoulder osteoarthritis with an intact
rotator cuff. Open-label prospective multicenter study. Joint Bone Spine; 2009.
1046. Lee, Lin-Chien, Lieu, Fu-Kong, Lee, Hung-Lin, Tung, Tao-Hsin. Effectiveness of hyaluronic
acid administration in treating adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder: a systematic review of
randomized controlled trials. BioMed research international; 2015.
1047. Honvo, G.,et al. Safety of intra-articular hyaluronic acid injections in osteoarthritis:
outcomes of a systematic review and meta-analysis. Drugs &amp; aging; 2019.
1048. Saito, S, Furuya, T, Kotake, S. Therapeutic effects of hyaluronate injections in patients
with chronic painful shoulder: A meta‐analysis of randomized controlled trials. Arthritis care
&amp; research; 2010.
1049. Tagliafico, A.,et al. Ultrasound-guided interventional procedures around the shoulder.
La radiologia medica; 2014.
1050. Sengul, L,, Oz, B,, Yolerl, O,, Olmez, N,, Memis, A,, Uluc, E. Sodium hyaluronate injections
compared to local modalities for the treatment of shoulder impingement syndrome. Turk J
Phys Med Rehab; 2008.
1051. Krasny, C., Enenkel, M., Aigner, N., Wlk, M., Landsiedl, F. Ultrasound-guided needling
combined with shock-wave therapy for the treatment of calcifying tendonitis of the shoulder.
J Bone Joint Surg Br; Apr 2005.
1052. Farin, PU, Räsänen, Heikki, Jaroma, Heikki, Harju, Arvi. Rotator cuff calcifications:
treatment with ultrasound-guided percutaneous needle aspiration and lavage. Skeletal
radiology; 1996.
1053. Maugars, Y., Varin, S., Gouin, F., Huguet, D., Rodet, D., Nizard, J., N'Guyen, J. M., Guillot,
P., Glemarec, J., Passutti, N., Berthelot, J. M. Treatment of shoulder calcifications of the cuff:
a controlled study. Joint Bone Spine; Jul 2009.
1054. Arias-Buría, José L, Fernández-de-Las-Peñas, César, Palacios-Ceña, María, Koppenhaver,
Shane L, Salom-Moreno, Jaime. Exercises and dry needling for subacromial pain syndrome: A
randomized parallel-group trial. The Journal of Pain; 2017.
1055. De Boer, Friso A, Mocking, Femke, Nelissen, Eelco M, Van Kampen, Paulien M,
Huijsmans, Pol E. Ultrasound guided needling vs radial shockwave therapy in calcific tendinitis
of the shoulder: a prospective randomized trial. Journal of orthopaedics; 2017.
1056. de Witte, Pieter Bas, Kolk, Arjen, Overes, Ferdinand, Nelissen, Rob GHH, Reijnierse,
Monique. Rotator cuff calcific tendinitis: ultrasound-guided needling and lavage versus
subacromial corticosteroids: five-year outcomes of a randomized controlled trial. The
American journal of sports medicine; 2017.
1057. Halle, Rob, Crowell, Michael, Goss, Donald. Dry needling and physical therapy versus
physical therapy alone following shoulder stabilization repair: a randomized clinical trial.
International journal of sports physical therapy; 2020.
1058. Hurley, Eoghan T, Hannon, Charles P, Pauzenberger, Leo, Fat, Daren Lim, Moran, Cathal
J, Mullett, Hannan. Nonoperative treatment of rotator cuff disease with platelet-rich plasma:
a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic
&amp; Related Surgery; 2019.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

758

1059. Kamali, Fahimeh, Sinaei, Ehsan, Morovati, Maryam. Comparison of upper trapezius and
infraspinatus myofascial trigger point therapy by dry needling in overhead athletes with
unilateral shoulder impingement syndrome. Journal of sport rehabilitation; 2019.
1060. Salom-Moreno, Jaime, Jiménez-Gómez, Laura, Gómez-Ahufinger, Victoria, PalaciosCeña, María, Arias-Buría, José L, Koppenhaver, Shane L, Fernández-de-las-Peñas, César.
Effects of low-load exercise on postneedling-induced pain after dry needling of active trigger
point in individuals with subacromial pain syndrome. PM&amp;R; 2017.
1061. Tsikopoulos, Konstantinos, Tsikopoulos, Ioannis, Simeonidis, Evangelos, Papathanasiou,
Efthymia, Haidich, Anna-Bettina, Anastasopoulos, Nikolaos, Natsis, Konstantinos. The clinical
impact of platelet-rich plasma on tendinopathy compared to placebo or dry needling
injections: A meta-analysis. Physical Therapy in Sport; 2016.
1062. Weiss, Leigh J, Wang, Dean, Hendel, Michael, Buzzerio, Philip, Rodeo, Scott A.
Management of rotator cuff injuries in the elite athlete. Current reviews in musculoskeletal
medicine; 2018.
1063. Kesikburun, Serdar, Tan, Arif Kenan, Yılmaz, Bilge, Yaşar, Evren, Yazıcıoğlu, Kamil.
Platelet-rich plasma injections in the treatment of chronic rotator cuff tendinopathy: a
randomized controlled trial with 1-year follow-up. The American journal of sports medicine;
2013.
1064. Mofrad, M. K.,et al. Periarticular Neurofascial Dextrose Prolotherapy Versus
Physiotherapy for the Treatment of Chronic Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy: Randomized Clinical
Trial. JCR: Journal of Clinical Rheumatology; 2020.
1065. Cole, Brandi, Lam, Patrick, Hackett, Lisa, Murrell, George AC. Ultrasound-guided
injections for supraspinatus tendinopathy: corticosteroid versus glucose prolotherapy–a
randomized controlled clinical trial. Shoulder &amp; elbow; 2018.
1066. Amanollahi, Asadollah, Asheghan, Mahsa, Hashemi, Seyed Ebrahim. Subacromial
corticosteroid injection versus subcutaneous 5% dextrose in patients with chronic rotator cuff
tendinopathy: A short-term randomized clinical trial. Interventional Medicine and Applied
Science; 2019.
1067. Bertrand, Helene, Reeves, Kenneth Dean, Bennett, Cameron J, Bicknell, Simon, Cheng,
An-Lin. Dextrose prolotherapy versus control injections in painful rotator cuff tendinopathy.
Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation; 2016.
1068. Catapano, M.,et al. Effectiveness of Dextrose Prolotherapy for Rotator Cuff
Tendinopathy: A Systematic Review. PM&amp;R; 2020.
1069. Chang, Yu-Ju, Chang, Feng-Hang, Hou, Peng-Hsuan, Tseng, Kai-Hsiang, Lin, Yen-Nung.
Effects of Hyperosmolar Dextrose Injection in Patients With Rotator Cuff Disease and Bursitis:
A Randomized Controlled Trial. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation; 2021.
1070. George, J.,et al. Comparative Effectiveness of Ultrasound-Guided Intratendinous
Prolotherapy Injection with Conventional Treatment to Treat Focal Supraspinatus Tendinosis.
Scientifica; 2018.
1071. Lin, C-L: Huang,C-C, Huang, S-W. Effects of hypertonic dextrose injection in chronic
supraspinatus tendinopathy of the shoulder: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. European
journal of physical and rehabilitation medicine; 2018.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

759

1072. Seven, M.,et al. Effectiveness of prolotherapy in the treatment of chronic rotator cuff
lesions. Orthopaedics &amp; Traumatology: Surgery &amp; Research; 2017.
1073. Abildgaard, Jeffrey T, Lonergan, Keith T, Tolan, Stefan J, Kissenberth, Michael J,
Hawkins, Richard J, Washburn III, Richard, Adams, Kyle J, Long, Catherine D, Shealy, E Carlisle,
Motley, Jay R. Liposomal bupivacaine versus indwelling interscalene nerve block for
postoperative pain control in shoulder arthroplasty: a prospective randomized controlled
trial. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery; 2017.
1074. Kolade, Oluwadamilola, Patel, Karan, Ihejirika, Rivka, Press, Daniel, Friedlander, Scott,
Roberts, Timothy, Rokito, Andrew S, Virk, Mandeep S. Efficacy of liposomal bupivacaine in
shoulder surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of shoulder and elbow
surgery; 2019.
1075. Malige, Ajith, Yeazell, Shawn, Ng-Pellegrino, Anna, Carolan, Gregory. Risk Factors for
Complications and Return to the Emergency Department after Interscalene Block Using
Liposomal Bupivacaine for Shoulder Surgery. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery; 2020.
1076. Mandava, Nikhil K, Sethi, Paul M, Routman, Howard D, Liddy, Nicole, Haidamous,
Georges, Denard, Patrick J. Opioid Requirement After Rotator Cuff Repair is Low With a
Multimodal Approach to Pain. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery; 2020.
1077. Namdari, Surena, Nicholson, Thema, Abboud, Joseph, Lazarus, Mark, Steinberg, Dean,
Williams, Gerald. Randomized controlled trial of interscalene block compared with injectable
liposomal bupivacaine in shoulder arthroplasty. JBJS; 2017.
1078. Sabesan, Vani J, Shahriar, Rajin, Petersen-Fitts, Graysen R, Whaley, James D, Bou-Akl,
Therese, Sweet, Matthew, Milia, Marc. A prospective randomized controlled trial to identify
the optimal postoperative pain management in shoulder arthroplasty: liposomal bupivacaine
versus continuous interscalene catheter. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery; 2017.
1079. Sethi, Paul M, Brameier, Devon T, Mandava, Nikhil K, Miller, Seth R. Liposomal
bupivacaine reduces opiate consumption after rotator cuff repair in a randomized controlled
trial. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery; 2019.
1080. Verdecchia, Nicole M, Rodosky, Mark W, Kentor, Michael, Orebaugh, Steven L.
Liposomal bupivacaine infiltration in the surgical site for analgesia after rotator cuff repair: a
randomized, double blinded, placebo-controlled trial. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery;
2020.
1081. Wang, Kun, Zhang, Hong-xia. Liposomal bupivacaine versus interscalene nerve block for
pain control after total shoulder arthroplasty: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
International Journal of Surgery; 2017.
1082. Centeno, Christopher, Fausel, Zachary, Stemper, Ian, Azuike, Ugochi, Dodson, Ehren. A
randomized controlled trial of the treatment of rotator cuff tears with bone marrow
concentrate and platelet products compared to exercise therapy: A midterm analysis. Stem
cells international; 2020.
1083. Chen, Xiao, Jones, Ian A, Togashi, Ryan, Park, Caron, Vangsness Jr, C Thomas. Use of
platelet-rich plasma for the improvement of pain and function in rotator cuff tears: a
systematic review and meta-analysis with bias assessment. The American journal of sports
medicine; 2020.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

760

1084. Cole, Brian J, Verma, Nikhil N, Yanke, Adam Blair, Bach, Bernard R, Otte, Robert
Stephen, Chubinskaya, Susan, Romeo, Anthony A, Southworth, Taylor Marie, Naveen, Neal
Bhojraj. Prospective randomized trial of biologic augmentation with mesenchymal stem cells
in patientsundergoing arthroscopic rotator cuff repair. Orthopaedic Journal of Sports
Medicine; 2019.
1085. Hurd, Jason L, Facile, Tiffany R, Weiss, Jennifer, Hayes, Matthew, Hayes, Meredith,
Furia, John P, Maffulli, Nicola, Winnier, Glenn E, Alt, Christopher, Schmitz, Christoph. Safety
and efficacy of treating symptomatic, partial-thickness rotator cuff tears with fresh,
uncultured, unmodified, autologous adipose-derived regenerative cells (UA-ADRCs) isolated
at the point of care: a prospective, randomized, controlled first-in-human pilot study. Journal
of Orthopaedic Surgery and Research; 2020.
1086. Jo, Chris Hyunchul, Chai, Jee Won, Jeong, Eui Cheol, Oh, Sohee, Yoon, Kang Sup.
Intratendinous injection of mesenchymal stem cells for the treatment of rotator cuff disease:
A 2-year follow-up study. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery;
2020.
1087. Lamas, José Ramón, García-Fernández, Carlos, Tornero-Esteban, Pilar, Lópiz, Yaiza,
Rodriguez-Rodriguez, Luis, Ortega, Luis, Fernández-Gutiérrez, Benjamín, Marco, Fernando.
Adverse effects of xenogenic scaffolding in the context of a randomized double-blind placebocontrolled study for repairing full-thickness rotator cuff tears. Trials; 2019.
1088. Liu, Fanxiao, Meng, Qingqi, Yin, Heyong, Yan, Zexing. Stem Cells in Rotator Cuff Injuries
and Reconstructions: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Current Stem Cell Research
&amp; Therapy; 2019.
1089. Pas, Haiko IMFL, Moen, Maarten H, Haisma, Hidde J, Winters, Marinus. No evidence for
the use of stem cell therapy for tendon disorders: a systematic review. British journal of sports
medicine; 2017.
1090. Tsekes, Dimitrios, Konstantopoulos, Georgios, Khan, Wasim S, Rossouw, Daniel, Elvey,
Mike, Singh, Jagwant. Use of stem cells and growth factors in rotator cuff tendon repair.
European Journal of Orthopaedic Surgery &amp; Traumatology; 2019.
1091. van den Boom, Noortje Anna Clasina, Winters, Marinus, Haisma, Hidde Jacobs, Moen,
Maarten Hendrik. Efficacy of Stem Cell Therapy for Tendon Disorders: A Systematic Review.
Orthopaedic Journal of Sports Medicine; 2020.
1092. Zumstein, Matthias, Rumian, A, Thelu, CE, Lesbats, V, O'Shea, K, Schaer, M, Boileau, P.
Use of platelet-and leucocyte-rich fibrin (L-PRF) does not affect late rotator cuff tendon
healing. A prospective randomized controlled study. 2012.
1093. Boneti, C., Arentz, C., Klimberg, V. S. Scapulothoracic bursitis as a significant cause of
breast and chest wall pain: underrecognized and undertreated. Ann Surg Oncol; Oct 2010.
1094. Bron, C., Dommerholt, J., Stegenga, B., Wensing, M., Oostendorp, R. A. High prevalence
of shoulder girdle muscles with myofascial trigger points in patients with shoulder pain. BMC
Musculoskeletal Disorders; 2011.
1095. Gobel, H., Heinze, A., Reichel, G., Hefter, H., Benecke, R. Efficacy and safety of a single
botulinum type A toxin complex treatment (Dysport) for the relief of upper back myofascial
pain syndrome: results from a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled multicentre
study. Pain; Nov 2006.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

761

1096. Hawk, C., Minkalis, A. L., Khorsan, R., Daniels, C. J., Homack, D., Gliedt, J. A., Hartman,
J. A., Bhalerao, S. Systematic Review of Nondrug, Nonsurgical Treatment of Shoulder
Conditions. Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics; 2017.
1097. Hsu, P. C., Wu, W. T., Han, D. S., Chang, K. V. Comparative effectiveness of botulinum
toxin injection for chronic shoulder pain: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Toxins; 2020.
1098. Kassolik, K.,et al. Recommendations of the polish society of physiotherapy, polish
society of family medicine and college of family physicians in Poland in the scope of
physiotherapy in painful shoulder syndrome in primary healthcare. Family Medicine and
Primary Care Review; 2018.
1099. Kim, D. Y., Kim, J. M. Safety and Efficacy of PrabotulinumtoxinA (Nabota(®)) Injection
for Cervical and Shoulder Girdle Myofascial Pain Syndrome: A Pilot Study. Toxins (Basel); Sep
3 2018.
1100. Liu, L., Huang, Q. M., Liu, Q. G., Ye, G., Bo, C. Z., Chen, M. J., Li, P. Effectiveness of dry
needling for myofascial trigger points associated with neck and shoulder pain: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; May 2015.
1101. Lugo, L. H., García, H. I., Rogers, H. L., Plata, J. A. Treatment of myofascial pain syndrome
with lidocaine injection and physical therapy, alone or in combination: a single blind,
randomized, controlled clinical trial. BMC Musculoskelet Disord; Feb 24 2016.
1102. Nicol, A. L., Wu.,II, Ferrante, F. M. Botulinum toxin type a injections for cervical and
shoulder girdle myofascial pain using an enriched protocol design. Anesth Analg; Jun 2014.
1103. Oh, Joo Han, Chung, Seok Won, Oh, Kyung-Soo, Yoo, Jae Chul, Jee, Wonhee, Choi, JungAh, Kim, Yang-Soo, Park, Jin-Young. Effect of recombinant human growth hormone on rotator
cuff healing after arthroscopic repair: preliminary result of a multicenter, prospective,
randomized, open-label blinded end point clinical exploratory trial. Journal of shoulder and
elbow surgery; 2018.
1104. Lane, Thomas A, Ho, Anthony D, Bashey, Asad, Peterson, Sandra, Young, Dennis, Law,
Ping. Mobilization of blood‐derived stem and progenitor cells in normal subjects by
granulocyte‐macrophage‐and granulocyte‐colony‐stimulating factors. Transfusion; 1999.
1105. Ross, David, Maerz, Tristan, Kurdziel, Michael, Hein, Joel, Doshi, Shashin, Bedi, Asheesh,
Anderson, Kyle, Baker, Kevin. The effect of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor on rotator
cuff healing after injury and repair. Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research®; 2015.
1106. Chae, Sang Hoon, Won, Jae Yeon, Yoo, Jae Chul. Clinical outcome of ultrasound-guided
atelocollagen injection for patients with partial rotator cuff tear in an outpatient clinic: a
preliminary study. Clinics in Shoulder and Elbow; 2020.
1107. Kim, In Bo, Kim, Eun Yeol, Lim, Kuk Pil, Heo, Ki Seong. Does the Use of Injectable
Atelocollagen during Arthroscopic Rotator Cuff Repair Improve Clinical and Structural
Outcomes?. Clinics in Shoulder and Elbow; 2019.
1108. Kim, Jong-Ho, Kim, Dong-Jin, Lee, Hyo-Jin, Kim, Baek-Kyu, Kim, Yang-Soo. Atelocollagen
injection improves tendon integrity in partial-thickness rotator cuff tears: A prospective
comparative study. Orthopaedic journal of sports medicine; 2020.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

762

1109. Post, M, J, Cohen. Impingement syndrome. A review of late stage II and early stage III
lesions. Clinical orthopaedics and related research; 1986.
1110. Ellman, H. Arthroscopic subacromial decompression: analysis of one- to three-year
results. Arthroscopy; 1987.
1111. Budoff, J. E., Rodin, D., Ochiai, D., Nirschl, R. P. Arthroscopic rotator cuff debridement
without decompression for the treatment of tendinosis. Arthroscopy; Sep 2005.
1112. Checroun, A. J., Dennis, M. G., Zuckerman, J. D. Open versus arthroscopic
decompression for subacromial impingement. A comprehensive review of the literature from
the last 25 years. Bull Hosp Jt Dis; 1998.
1113. Taverna, E., Battistella, F., Sansone, V., Perfetti, C., Tasto, J. P. Radiofrequency-based
plasma microtenotomy compared with arthroscopic subacromial decompression yields
equivalent outcomes for rotator cuff tendinosis. Arthroscopy; Oct 2007.
1114. Schroder, J., van Dijk, C. N., Wielinga, A., Kerkhoffs, G. M., Marti, R. K. Open versus
arthroscopic treatment of chronic rotator cuff impingement. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg; May
2001.
1115. Hawkins, R. J., Brock, R. M., Abrams, J. S., Hobeika, P. Acromioplasty for impingement
with an intact rotator cuff. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Nov 1988.
1116. Coghlan, J. A., Forbes, A., McKenzie, D., Bell, S. N., Buchbinder, R. Efficacy of
subacromial ropivacaine infusion for rotator cuff surgery. A randomized trial. J Bone Joint Surg
Am; Jul 2009.
1117. Ingvarsson, T., Hagglund, G., Johnsson, R. Anterior acromioplasty. A comparison of two
techniques. Int Orthop; 1996.
1118. Dorrestijn, O., Stevens, M., Winters, J. C., van der Meer, K., Diercks, R. L. Conservative
or surgical treatment for subacromial impingement syndrome? A systematic review. J
Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jul-Aug 2009.
1119. Kempf, J. F., Gleyze, P., Bonnomet, F., Walch, G., Mole, D., Frank, A., Beaufils, P.,
Levigne, C., Rio, B., Jaffe, A. A multicenter study of 210 rotator cuff tears treated by
arthroscopic acromioplasty. Arthroscopy; Jan-Feb 1999.
1120. Ellman, H., Kay, S. P. Arthroscopic subacromial decompression for chronic
impingement. Two- to five-year results. J Bone Joint Surg Br; May 1991.
1121. Altchek, D. W., Warren, R. F., Wickiewicz, T. L., Skyhar, M. J., Ortiz, G., Schwartz, E.
Arthroscopic acromioplasty. Technique and results. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Sep 1990.
1122. Gartsman, GM. Arthroscopic acromioplasty for lesions of the rotator cuff. J Bone Joint
Surg Am; 1990.
1123. Paulos, L. E., Franklin, J. L. Arthroscopic shoulder decompression development and
application. A five year experience. Am J Sports Med; May-Jun 1990.
1124. Boult, M., Wicks, M., Watson, D. I., MacDougal, G., Shimmin, A., Maddern, G. J.
Arthroscopic subacromial decompression with a holmium:YAG laser: review of the literature.
ANZ J Surg; Mar 2001.
1125. Speer, K. P., Lohnes, J., Garrett, W. E.,Jr. Arthroscopic subacromial decompression:
results in advanced impingement syndrome. Arthroscopy; 1991.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

763

1126. Rahme, H., Solem-Bertoft, E., Westerberg, C. E., Lundberg, E., Sorensen, S., Hilding, S.
The subacromial impingement syndrome. A study of results of treatment with special
emphasis on predictive factors and pain-generating mechanisms. Scand J Rehabil Med; Dec
1998.
1127. Haahr, J. P., Ostergaard, S., Dalsgaard, J., Norup, K., Frost, P., Lausen, S., Holm, E. A.,
Andersen, J. H. Exercises versus arthroscopic decompression in patients with subacromial
impingement: a randomised, controlled study in 90 cases with a one year follow up. Ann
Rheum Dis; May 2005.
1128. Brox, J. I., Staff, P. H., Ljunggren, A. E., Brevik, J. I. Arthroscopic surgery compared with
supervised exercises in patients with rotator cuff disease (stage II impingement syndrome).
Br Med J; Oct 9 1993.
1129. T'Jonck, L., Lysens, R., De Smet, L., Bellemans, J., Stoffelen, D., Tirez, B., Witvrouw, E.
Open versus arthroscopic subacromial decompression: analysis of one-year results.
Physiother Res Int; 1997.
1130. Lindh, M., Norlin, R. Arthroscopic subacromial decompression versus open
acromioplasty. A two-year follow-up study. Clin Orthop Relat Res; May 1993.
1131. Brox, J. I., Gjengedal, E., Uppheim, G., Bohmer, A. S., Brevik, J. I., Ljunggren, A. E., Staff,
P. H. Arthroscopic surgery versus supervised exercises in patients with rotator cuff disease
(stage II impingement syndrome): a prospective, randomized, controlled study in 125 patients
with a 2 1/2-year follow-up. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Mar-Apr 1999.
1132. Husby, T., Haugstvedt, J. R., Brandt, M., Holm, I., Steen, H. Open versus arthroscopic
subacromial decompression: a prospective, randomized study of 34 patients followed for 8
years. Acta Orthop Scand; Aug 2003.
1133. Haahr, J. P., Andersen, J. H. Exercises may be as efficient as subacromial decompression
in patients with subacromial stage II impingement: 4-8-years&#x27; follow-up in a
prospective, randomized study. Scand J Rheumatol; May-Jun 2006.
1134. Sachs, R. A., Stone, M. L., Devine, S. Open vs. arthroscopic acromioplasty: a prospective,
randomized study. Arthroscopy; Jun 1994.
1135. Odenbring, S., Wagner, P., Atroshi, I. Long-term outcomes of arthroscopic
acromioplasty for chronic shoulder impingement syndrome: a prospective cohort study with
a minimum of 12 years&#x27; follow-up. Arthroscopy; Oct 2008.
1136. Kukkonen, J, Joukainen, A, Lehtinen, J, Mattila, KT, Tuominen, EKJ, Kauko, T, Äärimaa,
V. Treatment of non-traumatic rotator cuff tears: A randomised controlled trial with one-year
clinical results. The bone &amp; joint journal; 2014.
1137. Carr, Andrew J, Murphy, Richard, Dakin, Stephanie G, Rombach, Ines, Wheway, Kim,
Watkins, Bridget, Franklin, Sarah L. Platelet-rich plasma injection with arthroscopic
acromioplasty for chronic rotator cuff tendinopathy: a randomized controlled trial. The
American journal of sports medicine; 2015.
1138. Chahal, J., Mall, N., MacDonald, P. B., Van Thiel, G., Cole, B. J., Romeo, A. A., Verma, N.
N. The role of subacromial decompression in patients undergoing arthroscopic repair of fullthickness tears of the rotator cuff: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arthroscopy; May
2012.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

764

1139. Farfaras, Stefanos, Sernert, Ninni, Hallström, Erling, Kartus, Jüri. Comparison of open
acromioplasty, arthroscopic acromioplasty and physiotherapy in patients with subacromial
impingement syndrome: a prospective randomised study. Knee Surgery, Sports
Traumatology, Arthroscopy; 2016.
1140. Farfaras, Stefanos, Sernert, Ninni, Rostgard Christensen, Lars, Hallström, Erling K,
Kartus, Jüri-Toomas. Subacromial decompression yields a better clinical outcome than
therapy alone: a prospective randomized study of patients with a minimum 10-year followup. The American journal of sports medicine; 2018.
1141. Kolk, Arjen, Thomassen, Bregje JW, Hund, Hajo, de Witte, Pieter Bas, Henkus, Hans-Erik,
Wassenaar, Willem G, van Arkel, Ewoud RA, Nelissen, Rob GHH. Does acromioplasty result in
favorable clinical and radiologic outcomes in the management of chronic subacromial pain
syndrome? A double-blinded randomized clinical trial with 9 to 14 years&#x27; follow-up.
Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2017.
1142. MacDonald, P., McRae, S., Leiter, J., Mascarenhas, R., Lapner, P. Arthroscopic rotator
cuff repair with and without acromioplasty in the treatment of full-thickness rotator cuff
tears: a multicenter, randomized controlled trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Nov 2 2011.
1143. Shin, Sang-Jin, Oh, Joo Han, Chung, Seok Won, Song, Mi Hyun. The efficacy of
acromioplasty in the arthroscopic repair of small-to medium-sized rotator cuff tears without
acromial spur: prospective comparative study. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic
&amp; Related Surgery; 2012.
1144. Bodendorfer, B. M., DeFroda, S. F., Shu, H. T., Knapik, D. M., Yang, D. S., Verma, N. N.
Incidence of Pectoralis Major Injuries Has Increased 40% Over the Last 22 National Football
League Seasons. Arthrosc Sports Med Rehabil; Aug 2021.
1145. Bengtsson, Marie, Lunsjö, Karl, Hermodsson, Ylva, Nordqvist, Anders, Abu-Zidan, Fikri
M. High patient satisfaction after arthroscopic subacromial decompression for shoulder
impingement: a prospective study of 50 patients. Acta orthopaedica; 2006.
1146. Bhattacharyya, Rahul, Edwards, Kimberley, Wallace, Angus W. Does arthroscopic subacromial decompression really work for sub-acromial impingement syndrome: a cohort study.
BMC musculoskeletal disorders; 2014.
1147. Biberthaler, Peter, Beirer, Marc, Kirchhoff, Sonja, Braunstein, Volker, Wiedemann,
Ernst, Kirchhoff, Chlodwig. Significant benefit for older patients after arthroscopic
subacromial decompression: a long-term follow-up study. International orthopaedics; 2013.
1148. Butt, U, Whiteman, A, Wilson, J, Paul, E, Roy, B. Does arthroscopic subacromial
decompression improve quality of life. The annals of the royal college of surgeons of England;
2015.
1149. Dong, Wei, Goost, Hans, Lin, Xiang-Bo, Burger, Christof, Paul, Christian, Wang, Zeng-Li,
Zhang, Tian-Yi, Jiang, Zhi-Chao, Welle, Kristian, Kabir, Koroush. Treatments for shoulder
impingement syndrome: a PRISMA systematic review and network meta-analysis. Medicine;
2015.
1150. Donigan, Jonathan A, Wolf, Brian R. Arthroscopic subacromial decompression:
acromioplasty versus bursectomy alone-does it really matter? A systematic review. The Iowa
orthopaedic journal; 2011.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

765

1151. Ketola, Saara, Lehtinen, Janne, Elo, Petra, Kortelainen, Seppo, Huhtala, Heini, Arnala,
Ilkka. No difference in long-term development of rotator cuff rupture and muscle volumes in
impingement patients with or without decompression: a randomized MRI study of 140
patients. Acta orthopaedica; 2016.
1152. Nutton, Richard W, Mcbirnie, Julie M, Phillips, Christine. Treatment of chronic rotatorcuff impingement by arthroscopic subacromial decompression. The Journal of bone and joint
surgery. British volume; 1997.
1153. Viner, Gean C, He, Jun Kit, Brabston, Eugene W, Momaya, Amit, Ponce, Brent A. Os
acromiale: systematic review of surgical outcomes. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery;
2020.
1154. Cai, Y. Z.,et al. Arthroscopic Rotator Cuff Repair With Graft Augmentation of 3Dimensional Biological Collagen for Moderate to Large Tears: A Randomized Controlled Study.
Am J Sports Med; 2018.
1155. Greenall, G.,et al. Systematic review of the surgical management of rotator cuff repair
with an augmentative patch: a feasibility study protocol. Syst Rev; 2018.
1156. Badhe, S. P.,et al. An assessment of porcine dermal xenograft as an augmentation graft
in the treatment of extensive rotator cuff tears. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; 2008.
1157. Iannotti, J. P., Codsi, M. J., Kwon, Y. W., Derwin, K., Ciccone, J., Brems, J. J. Porcine small
intestine submucosa augmentation of surgical repair of chronic two-tendon rotator cuff tears.
A randomized, controlled trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jun 2006.
1158. D'Ambrosi, R.,et al. Retears and complication rates after arthroscopic rotator cuff repair
with scaffolds: a systematic review. Cell Tissue Bank; 2019.
1159. Johnson, S. M., Cherry, J. V., Thomas, N., Jafri, M., Jariwala, A., McLeod, G. G. Clinical
outcomes and ultrasonographic viability of GraftJacket(R) augmented rotator cuff repair: a
prospective follow-up study with mean follow-up of forty-one months. J Clin Orthop Trauma;
May 2020.
1160. Longo, U. G., Lamberti, A., Maffulli, N., Denaro, V. Tendon augmentation grafts: a
systematic review. Br Med Bull; 2010.
1161. Malcarney, H. L., Bonar, F., Murrell, G. A. Early inflammatory reaction after rotator cuff
repair with a porcine small intestine submucosal implant: a report of 4 cases. Am J Sports
Med; Jun 2005.
1162. Narayanan, Ganesh, Nair, Lakshmi S., Laurencin, Cato T. Regenerative Engineering of
the Rotator Cuff of the Shoulder. ACS Biomaterials Science &amp; Engineering; 2018.
1163. Rodeo, S. A., Delos, D., Williams, R. J., Adler, R. S., Pearle, A., Warren, R. F. The effect of
platelet-rich fibrin matrix on rotator cuff tendon healing: a prospective, randomized clinical
study. Am J Sports Med; Jun 2012.
1164. Schlegel, T. F., Abrams, J. S., Bushnell, B. D., Brock, J. L., Ho, C. P. Radiologic and clinical
evaluation of a bioabsorbable collagen implant to treat partial-thickness tears: a prospective
multicenter study. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Feb 2018.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

766

1165. Stace, E. T., Nagra, N. S., Tiberwel, S., Khan, W., Carr, A. J. The Use of Electrospun
Scaffolds in Musculoskeletal Tissue Engineering: A Focus on Tendon and the Rotator Cuff. Curr
Stem Cell Res Ther; 2018.
1166. Thangarajah, T., Pendegrass, C. J., Shahbazi, S., Lambert, S., Alexander, S., Blunn, G. W.
Augmentation of Rotator Cuff Repair With Soft Tissue Scaffolds. Orthop J Sports Med; Jun
2015.
1167. Thon, S. G., O'Malley, L.,2nd, O'Brien, M. J., Savoie, F. H.,3rd. Evaluation of Healing Rates
and Safety With a Bioinductive Collagen Patch for Large and Massive Rotator Cuff Tears: 2Year Safety and Clinical Outcomes. Am J Sports Med; Jul 2019.
1168. Franceschi, F,et al. To detach the long head of the biceps tendon after tenodesis or not:
outcome analysis at the 4-year follow-up of two different techniques. International
Orthopaedics; 2007.
1169. Koh, K. H.,et al. Treatment of biceps tendon lesions in the setting of rotator cuff tears:
prospective cohort study of tenotomy versus tenodesis. American journal of sports medicine;
2010.
1170. Abraham, Vineet Thomas, Tan, Bryan HM, Kumar, V Prem. Systematic review of biceps
tenodesis: arthroscopic versus open. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic &amp; Related
Surgery; 2016.
1171. Aflatooni, Justin O, Meeks, Brett D, Froehle, Andrew W, Bonner, Kevin F. Biceps
tenotomy versus tenodesis: patient-reported outcomes and satisfaction. Journal of
Orthopaedic Surgery and Research; 2020.
1172. Baumgarten, Keith M, Chang, Peter S, Foley, Elaine K. Patient-determined outcomes
after arthroscopic rotator cuff repair with and without biceps tenodesis utilizing the PITT
technique. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2019.
1173. Bayle, Xavier, Pham, Thuy-Trang, Faruch, Marie, Gobet, Aurelie, Mansat, Pierre,
Bonnevialle, Nicolas. No difference in outcome for open versus arthroscopic rotator cuff
repair: a prospective comparative trial. Archives of orthopaedic and trauma surgery; 2017.
1174. Belay, Elshaday S, Wittstein, Jocelyn R, Garrigues, Grant E, Lassiter, Tally E, Scribani,
Melissa, Goldner, Richard D, Bean, Christopher A. Biceps tenotomy has earlier pain relief
compared to biceps tenodesis: a randomized prospective study. Knee Surgery, Sports
Traumatology, Arthroscopy; 2019.
1175. Biz, Carlo, Vinanti, Giovanni Battista, Rossato, Alberto, Arnaldi, Enrico, Aldegheri,
Roberto. Prospective study of three surgical procedures for long head biceps tendinopathy
associated with rotator cuff tears. Muscles, ligaments and tendons journal; 2012.
1176. Boileau, Pascal, Baqué, François, Valerio, Laure, Ahrens, Philip, Chuinard, Christopher,
Trojani, Christophe. Isolated arthroscopic biceps tenotomy or tenodesis improves symptoms
in patients with massive irreparable rotator cuff tears. JBJS; 2007.
1177. Castricini, R.,et al. Tenodesis is not superior to tenotomy in the treatment of the long
head of biceps tendon lesions. Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy; 2018.
1178. Cavalier, Maxime, Jullion, Stéphane, Kany, Jean, Grimberg, Jean, Lefebvre, Yves, Oudet,
Didier, Grosclaude, Sophie, Charousset, Christophe, Boileau, Pascal, Joudet, Thierry.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

767

Management of massive rotator cuff tears: prospective study in 218 patients. Orthopaedics
&amp; Traumatology: Surgery &amp; Research; 2018.
1179. Chalmers, Peter N, Monson, Brett, Frank, Rachel M, Mascarenhas, Randy, Nicholson,
Gregory P, Bach, Bernard R, Verma, Nikhil N, Cole, Brian J, Romeo, Anthony A. Combined SLAP
repair and biceps tenodesis for superior labral anterior–posterior tears. Knee Surgery, Sports
Traumatology, Arthroscopy; 2016.
1180. Cho, Nam Su, Cha, Sang Won, Rhee, Yong Girl. Funnel tenotomy versus intracuff
tenodesis for lesions of the long head of the biceps tendon associated with rotator cuff tears.
The American Journal of Sports Medicine; 2014.
1181. Çinar, B Murat, Tuncay, Cengiz. Clinical and isokinetic comparison between tenotomy
and tenodesis in biceps pathologies. Acta Orthop Traumatol Turc; 2011.
1182. Clement, X, Baldairon, F, Clavert, P, Kempf, J-F. Popeye sign: Tenodesis vs. self-locking
“T” tenotomy of the long head of the biceps. Orthopaedics &amp; Traumatology: Surgery
&amp; Research; 2018.
1183. Cvetanovich, Gregory L, Gowd, Anirudh K, Frantz, Travis L, Erickson, Brandon J, Romeo,
Anthony A. Superior Labral Anterior Posterior Repair and Biceps Tenodesis Surgery: Trends of
the American Board of Orthopaedic Surgery Database. The American Journal of Sports
Medicine; 2020.
1184. Dwyer, Corey, Kia, Cameron, Apostolakos, John M, DiVenere, Jessica, Dyrna, Felix, Cote,
Mark, Arciero, Robert A, Mazzocca, Augustus D. Clinical outcomes after biceps tenodesis or
tenotomy using subpectoral pain to guide management in patients with rotator cuff tears.
Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery; 2019.
1185. Eguia, Francisco A, Ali, Iman, Bansal, Ankit, McFarland, Edward G, Srikumaran, Uma.
Minimal clinically important differences after subpectoral biceps tenodesis: definition and
retrospective assessment of predictive factors. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery; 2020.
1186. Erickson, Brandon J, Basques, Bryce A, Griffin, Justin W, Taylor, Samuel A, O'Brien,
Stephen J, Verma, Nikhil N, Romeo, Anthony A. The effect of concomitant biceps tenodesis
on reoperation rates after rotator cuff repair: a review of a large private-payer database from
2007 to 2014. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery; 2017.
1187. Erşen, Ali, Ozben, Hakan, Demirhan, Mehmet, Atalar, Ata Can, Kapıcıoğlu, Mehmet.
Time-dependent changes after latissimus dorsi transfer: tenodesis or tendon transfer?.
Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research®; 2014.
1188. Fang, Jing‐hua, Dai, Xue‐song, Yu, Xin‐ning, Luo, Jian‐yang, Liu, Xiao‐nan, Zhang, Miao‐
feng, Zhu, Su‐nan. Lesions of the Long Head of the Biceps Tendon Concomitant with Rotator
Cuff Tears: Tenotomy or Subpectoral Mini‐open Tenodesis? A Comparative Short to Mid‐term
Follow‐up Study. Orthopaedic surgery; 2019.
1189. Faruqui, Sami, Kotob, Mohammad A, Hanna, Courtney C, Foad, Abdullah. The modified
Norwegian method of biceps tenodesis: how well does it work?. Knee Surgery, Sports
Traumatology, Arthroscopy; 2017.
1190. Forsythe, B,et al. Arthroscopic suprapectoral and open subpectoral biceps tenodeses
produce similar outcomes: a randomized prospective analysis. Journal of Arthroscopic &amp;
Related Surgery; 2020.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

768

1191. Franceschetti, E,et al. The management of the long head of the biceps in rotator cuff
repair: A comparative study of high vs. subpectoral tenodesis. Journal of Sport and Health
Science; 2020.
1192. Glait, Sergio A, Mahure, Siddharth, Loomis, Cynthia A, Cammer, Michael, Pham, Hien,
Feldman, Andrew, Jazrawi, Laith M, Strauss, Eric J. Regional histologic differences in the long
head of the biceps tendon following subpectoral biceps tenodesis in patients with rotator cuff
tears and SLAP lesions. Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy; 2018.
1193. Godenèche, Arnaud, Kempf, Jean-François, Nové-Josserand, Laurent, Michelet, Aude,
Saffarini, Mo, Hannink, Gerjon, Collin, Philippe. Tenodesis renders better results than
tenotomy in repairs of isolated supraspinatus tears with pathologic biceps. Journal of shoulder
and elbow surgery; 2018.
1194. Gottschalk, Michael B, Karas, Spero G, Ghattas, Timothy N, Burdette, Rachel.
Subpectoral biceps tenodesis for the treatment of type II and IV superior labral anterior and
posterior lesions. The American journal of sports medicine; 2014.
1195. Green, Jamison M, Getelman, Mark H, Snyder, Stephen J, Burns, Joseph P. Allarthroscopic suprapectoral versus open subpectoral tenodesis of the long head of the biceps
brachii without the use of interference screws. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic
&amp; Related Surgery; 2017.
1196. Gurnani, N., van Deurzen, D. F., Janmaat, V. T., van den Bekerom, M. P. Tenotomy or
tenodesis for pathology of the long head of the biceps brachii: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc; Dec 2016.
1197. Hufeland, M.,et al. Biceps tenodesis versus tenotomy in isolated LHB lesions: a
prospective randomized clinical trial. Archives of Orthopaedic and Trauma Surgery; 2019.
1198. Ikemoto, Roberto Yukio, Pileggi, Paulo Eduardo, Murachovsky, Joel, Nascimento, Luís
Gustavo Prata, Serpone, Rogerio Bueno, Strose, Eric, Oliveira, Luiz Henrique Almeida.
Tenotomy with or without tenodesis of the long head of the biceps using repair of the rotator
cuff. Revista Brasileira de Ortopedia (English Edition); 2012.
1199. Jacxsens, Matthijs, Granger, Erin K, Tashjian, Robert Z. Clinical and sonographic
evaluation of subpectoral biceps tenodesis with a dual suture anchor technique demonstrates
improved outcomes and a low failure rate at a minimum 2-year follow-up. Archives of
Orthopaedic and Trauma Surgery; 2018.
1200. Kim, Jangwoo, Nam, Ji Hoon, Kim, Yuna, Kim, Jong Seop, Kim, Sae Hoon. Long Head of
the Biceps Tendon Tenotomy versus Subpectoral Tenodesis in Rotator Cuff Repair. Clinics in
Orthopedic Surgery; 2020.
1201. Kooistra, Bauke, Gurnani, Navin, Weening, Alexander, van den Bekerom, Michel, van
Deurzen, Derek. Low level of evidence for all treatment modalities for irreparable
posterosuperior rotator cuff tears. Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy; 2019.
1202. Kukkonen, Juha, Rantakokko, Juho, Virolainen, Petri, Äärimaa, Ville. The effect of biceps
procedure on the outcome of rotator cuff reconstruction. International Scholarly Research
Notices; 2013.
1203. Lee, Hyo-Jin, Jeong, Jin-Young, Kim, Chul-Kyu, Kim, Yang-Soo. Surgical treatment of
lesions of the long head of the biceps brachii tendon with rotator cuff tear: a prospective

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

769

randomized clinical trial comparing the clinical results of tenotomy and tenodesis. Journal of
shoulder and elbow surgery; 2016.
1204. Leroux, Timothy, Chahal, Jaskarndip, Wasserstein, David, Verma, Nikhil N, Romeo,
Anthony A. A systematic review and meta-analysis comparing clinical outcomes after
concurrent rotator cuff repair and long head biceps tenodesis or tenotomy. Sports health;
2015.
1205. Lim, Sungjoon, Kim, Sang Ki, Kim, Yang-Soo. Comparison between SLAP Repair and
Biceps Tenodesis with Concomitant Rotator Cuff Repair in Patients Older than 45 Years:
Minimum 2-Year Clinical and Imaging Outcomes. Clinics in Orthopedic Surgery; 2020.
1206. Mardani-Kivi, M., Keyhani, S., Ebrahim-Zadeh, M. H., Hashemi-Motlagh, K., SahebEkhtiari, K. Rotator cuff tear with concomitant long head of biceps tendon (LHBT)
degeneration: what is the preferred choice? Open subpectoral versus arthroscopic
intraarticular tenodesis. J Orthop Traumatol; Jul 5 2019.
1207. Mazzocca, Augustus D, Cote, Mark P, Arciero, Cristina L, Romeo, Anthony A, Arciero,
Robert A. Clinical outcomes after subpectoral biceps tenodesis with an interference screw.
The American journal of sports medicine; 2008.
1208. McCrum, Christopher L, Alluri, R Kiran, Batech, Michael, Mirzayan, Raffy. Complications
of biceps tenodesis based on location, fixation, and indication: A review of 1526 shoulders.
Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2019.
1209. Meghpara, Mitchell B, Schulz, William, Buerba, Rafael A, Golan, Elan J, Vyas, Dharmesh.
Clinical Outcomes of an All-Arthroscopic Biceps Tenodesis Using the Anterolateral Anchor
During Concomitant Double-Row Rotator Cuff Repair. Orthopaedic Journal of Sports
Medicine; 2020.
1210. Meraner, Dominik, Sternberg, Christoph, Vega, Jordi, Hahne, Julia, Kleine, Michael,
Leuzinger, Jan. Arthroscopic tenodesis versus tenotomy of the long head of biceps tendon in
simultaneous rotator cuff repair. Archives of orthopaedic and trauma surgery; 2016.
1211. Mijic, Dragomir, Kurowicki, Jennifer, Berglund, Derek, Rosas, Samuel, McNeely,
Emmanuel, Motisi, Matthew, Polisetty, Teja, Levy, Jonathan C. Effect of biceps tenodesis on
speed of recovery after arthroscopic rotator cuff repair. JSES International; 2020.
1212. Na, Yuyan, Zhu, Yong, Shi, Yuting, Ren, Yizhong, Zhang, Ting, Liu, Wanlin, Han, Changxu.
A meta-analysis comparing tenotomy or tenodesis for lesions of the long head of the biceps
tendon with concomitant reparable rotator cuff tears. Journal of Orthopaedic Surgery and
Research; 2019.
1213. Nho, Shane J, Frank, Rachel M, Reiff, Stefanie N, Verma, Nikhil N, Romeo, Anthony A.
Arthroscopic repair of anterosuperior rotator cuff tears combined with open biceps
tenodesis. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery; 2010.
1214. Oh, Joo Han, Lee, Ye Hyun, Kim, Sae Hoon, Park, Ji Soon, Seo, Hyuk Jun, Kim, Woo, Park,
Hae Bong. Comparison of treatments for superior labrum–biceps complex lesions with
concomitant rotator cuff repair: A prospective, randomized, comparative analysis of
debridement, biceps tenotomy, and biceps tenodesis. Arthroscopy: The Journal of
Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery; 2016.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

770

1215. Park, Ji Soon, Kim, Sae Hoon, Jung, Ho Jin, Lee, Ye Hyun, Oh, Joo Han. A prospective
randomized study comparing the interference screw and suture anchor techniques for biceps
tenodesis. The American journal of sports medicine; 2017.
1216. Provencher, Matthew T, McCormick, Frank, Peebles, Liam A, Beaulieu-Jones, Brendin
R, Dekker, Travis J, LeClere, Lance E, Anthony, Shawn, Solomon, Daniel J, Golijanin, Petar,
Dewing, Christopher. Outcomes of Primary Biceps Subpectoral Tenodesis in an Active
Population: A Prospective Evaluation of 101 Patients. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic
&amp; Related Surgery; 2019.
1217. Shang, Xiliang, Chen, Jiwu, Chen, Shiyi. A meta-analysis comparing tenotomy and
tenodesis for treating rotator cuff tears combined with long head of the biceps tendon lesions.
PLoS One; 2017.
1218. Simmen, Beat R, Bachmann, Lucas M, Drerup, Susann, Schwyzer, Hans-Kaspar,
Burkhart, Andreas, Flury, Matthias P, Goldhahn, Jörg. Usefulness of concomitant biceps
tenodesis in total shoulder arthroplasty: a prospective cohort study. Journal of shoulder and
elbow surgery; 2008.
1219. Uschok, S, Herrmann, S, Pauly, S, Perka, C, Greiner, S. Combined arthroscopic tenodesis
of the long head of biceps and rotator cuff repair in antero-superior cuff tears. Archives of
orthopaedic and trauma surgery; 2016.
1220. Soliman, Omar A, Koptan, Wael MT. Proximal humeral fractures treated with
hemiarthroplasty: does tenodesis of the long head of the biceps improve results?. Injury;
2013.
1221. Voss, Andreas, Cerciello, Simone, DiVenere, Jessica, Solovyova, Olga, Dyrna, Felix,
Apostolakos, John, Lam, David, Cote, Mark P, Beitzel, Knut, Mazzocca, Augustus D. Open
subpectoral biceps tenodesis in patients over 65 does not result in an increased rate of
complications. BMC musculoskeletal disorders; 2017.
1222. Watson, Scott T, Robbins, Christopher B, Bedi, Asheesh, Carpenter, James E, Gagnier,
Joel J, Miller, Bruce S. Comparison of outcomes 1 year after rotator cuff repair with and
without concomitant biceps surgery. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic &amp; Related
Surgery; 2017.
1223. Yi, Gang, Yang, Jing, Zhang, Lei, Liu, Yang, Guo, Xiaoguang, Fu, Shijie. Small‑incision open
distal subpectoral vs. arthroscopic proximal biceps tenodesis for biceps long head tendon
lesions with repair of rotator cuff tears. Experimental and Therapeutic Medicine; 2020.
1224. Yi, Young, Lee, Jong-Myoung, Kwon, Seok Hyun, Kim, Jeong-Woo. Arthroscopic proximal
versus open subpectoral biceps tenodesis with arthroscopic repair of small-or medium-sized
rotator cuff tears. Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy; 2016.
1225. Zhang, Qiang, Zhou, Jiaojiao, Cheng, Biao. Tenotomy or tenodesis for long head biceps
lesions in shoulders with reparable rotator cuff tears: a prospective randomised trial. Knee
Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy; 2015.
1226. Barber, F. A., Burns, J. P., Deutsch, A., Labbe, M. R., Litchfield, R. B. A prospective,
randomized evaluation of acellular human dermal matrix augmentation for arthroscopic
rotator cuff repair. Arthroscopy; Jan 2012.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

771

1227. Gupta, A. K., Hug, K., Boggess, B., Gavigan, M., Toth, A. P. Massive or 2-tendon rotator
cuff tears in active patients with minimal glenohumeral arthritis: clinical and radiographic
outcomes of reconstruction using dermal tissue matrix xenograft. Am J Sports Med; Apr 2013.
1228. Hall, T., Danielson, K., Brandenburg, S., Matelic, T. A case series of recurrent
myotendinous rotator cuff tears repaired and augmented with dermal allograft: clinical
outcomes at two years. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Nov 2020.
1229. Hohn, E. A., Gillette, B. P., Burns, J. P. Outcomes of arthroscopic revision rotator cuff
repair with acellular human dermal matrix allograft augmentation. J Shoulder Elbow Surg;
May 2018.
1230. Papalia, R., Franceschi, F., Zampogna, B., D'Adamio, S., Maffulli, N., Denaro, V.
Augmentation techniques for rotator cuff repair. Br Med Bull; 2013.
1231. Pennington, W. T., Bartz, B. A., Pauli, J. M., Walker, C. E., Schmidt, W. Arthroscopic
Superior Capsular Reconstruction With Acellular Dermal Allograft for the Treatment of
Massive Irreparable Rotator Cuff Tears: Short-Term Clinical Outcomes and the Radiographic
Parameter of Superior Capsular Distance. Arthroscopy; Jun 2018.
1232. Petri, M., Warth, R. J., Horan, M. P., Greenspoon, J. A., Millett, P. J. Outcomes After
Open Revision Repair of Massive Rotator Cuff Tears With Biologic Patch Augmentation.
Arthroscopy; Sep 2016.
1233. Yoon, J. P., Chung, S. W., Kim, J. Y., Lee, B. J., Kim, H. S., Kim, J. E., Cho, J. H. Outcomes
of Combined Bone Marrow Stimulation and Patch Augmentation for Massive Rotator Cuff
Tears. Am J Sports Med; Apr 2016.
1234. Al-Ani, Zeiad, Jacobsen, Eivind Wergeland, Kartus, Jüri-Toomas, Knutsen, Gunnar,
Meknas, Khaled. Radiofrequency microtenotomy: a promising method for treatment of
rotator cuff tendinopathy. Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy; 2019.
1235. Toliopoulos, Panagiota, Desmeules, François, Boudreault, Jennifer, Roy, Jean-Sébastien,
Frémont, Pierre, MacDermid, Joy C, Dionne, Clermont E. Efficacy of surgery for rotator cuff
tendinopathy: a systematic review. Clinical Rheumatology; 2014.
1236. Lu, Yi, Zhang, Qiang, Zhu, Yiming, Jiang, Chunyan. Is radiofrequency treatment effective
for shoulder impingement syndrome? A prospective randomized controlled study. Journal of
shoulder and elbow surgery; 2013.
1237. Gebremariam, Lukas, Hay, Elaine M, Koes, Bart W, Huisstede, Bionka M. Effectiveness
of surgical and postsurgical interventions for the subacromial impingement syndrome: a
systematic review. Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation; 2011.
1238. Baumann, B., Genning, K., Bohm, D., Rolf, O., Gohlke, F. Arthroscopic prevalence of
pulley lesions in 1007 consecutive patients. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jan-Feb 2008.
1239. Baptista, Eduardo, Malavolta, Eduardo A, Gracitelli, Mauro EC, Alvarenga, Daniel,
Bordalo-Rodrigues, Marcelo, Neto, Arnaldo A Ferreira, de Barros, Nestor. Diagnostic accuracy
of MRI for detection of tears and instability of proximal long head of biceps tendon: an
evaluation of 100 shoulders compared with arthroscopy. Skeletal radiology; 2019.
1240. Dubrow, Samuel A, Streit, Jonathan J, Shishani, Yousef, Robbin, Mark R, Gobezie,
Reuben. Diagnostic accuracy in detecting tears in the proximal biceps tendon using standard
nonenhancing shoulder MRI. Open access journal of sports medicine; 2014.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

772

1241. Kim, Bo Ra, Lee, Jaehyung, Ahn, Joong Mo, Kang, Yusuhn, Lee, Eugene, Lee, Joon Woo,
Kang, Heung Sik. Predicting the clinically significant subscapularis tendon tear: malposition
and tear of the long head of the biceps tendon on shoulder magnetic resonance imaging. Acta
Radiologica; 2020.
1242. Kim, Jung Youn, Rhee, Sung-Min, Rhee, Yong Girl. Accuracy of MRI in diagnosing intraarticular pathology of the long head of the biceps tendon: results with a large cohort of
patients. BMC musculoskeletal disorders; 2019.
1243. Lee, Ji Ho, Rhyou, In Hyeok, Ahn, Kee Baek. Prediction of the anterior shoulder pain
source by detecting indirect signs for partial articular subscapularis tendon tears through
conventional magnetic resonance imaging. Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy;
2020.
1244. Lee, Ro Woon, Choi, Soo-Jung, Lee, Man Ho, Ahn, Jae Hong, Shin, Dong Rock, Kang,
Chae Hoon, Lee, Ki Won. Diagnostic accuracy of 3T conventional shoulder MRI in the detection
of the long head of the biceps tendon tears associated with rotator cuff tendon tears. Skeletal
radiology; 2016.
1245. Nascimento, Alexandre Tadeu do, Claudio, Gustavo Kogake. Magnetic resonance
imaging without contrast as a diagnostic method for partial injury of the long head of the
biceps tendon. Revista brasileira de ortopedia; 2017.
1246. Schaeffeler, Christoph, Waldt, Simone, Holzapfel, Konstantin, Kirchhoff, Chlodwig,
Jungmann, Pia M, Wolf, Petra, Schröder, Michael, Rummeny, Ernst J, Imhoff, Andreas B,
Woertler, Klaus. Lesions of the biceps pulley: diagnostic accuracy of MR arthrography of the
shoulder and evaluation of previously described and new diagnostic signs. Radiology; 2012.
1247. Alizadeh, Ahmad, Mardani-Kivi, Mohsen, Ebrahimzadeh, Mohammad Hosein, Rouhani,
Alireza, Hashemi, Keyvan, Saheb-Ekhtiari, Khashayar. A randomized prospective comparative
study of four methods of biceps tendonitis treatment: Ultrasound, low-level laser+
ultrasound, intra-sheath, and extra-sheath corticosteroid guided injection. Shiraz E Medical
Journal; 2018.
1248. van Kampen, Derk A, van den Berg, Tobias, van der Woude, Henk Jan, Castelein, René
M, Terwee, Caroline B, Willems, W Jaap. Diagnostic value of patient characteristics, history,
and six clinical tests for traumatic anterior shoulder instability. Journal of shoulder and elbow
surgery; 2013.
1249. Holt, Tim A, Mant, David, Carr, Andrew, Gwilym, Stephen, Beard, David, Toms, Christy,
Yu, Ly-Mee, Rees, Jonathan. Corticosteroid injection for shoulder pain: single-blind
randomized pilot trial in primary care. Trials; 2013.
1250. Yiannakopoulos, Christos K, Megaloikonomos, Panayiotis D, Foufa, Konstantina, Gliatis,
John. Ultrasound-guided versus palpation-guided corticosteroid injections for tendinosis of
the long head of the biceps: A randomized comparative study. Skeletal radiology; 2020.
1251. Anil, U., Hurley, E. T., Kingery, M. T., Pauzenberger, L., Mullett, H., Strauss, E. J. Surgical
treatment for long head of the biceps tendinopathy: a network meta-analysis. J Shoulder
Elbow Surg; Jun 2020.
1252. Creech, M. J., Yeung, M., Denkers, M., Simunovic, N., Athwal, G. S., Ayeni, O. R. Surgical
indications for long head biceps tenodesis: a systematic review. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol
Arthrosc; Jul 2016.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

773

1253. Hsu, A. R., Ghodadra, N. S., Provencher, M. T., Lewis, P. B., Bach, B. R. Biceps tenotomy
versus tenodesis: a review of clinical outcomes and biomechanical results. J Shoulder Elbow
Surg; Mar 2011.
1254. van Deurzen, D. F. P., Gurnani, N., Alta, T. D. W., Willems, J. H., Onstenk, R., van den
Bekerom, M. P. J. Suprapectoral versus subpectoral tenodesis for Long Head Biceps Brachii
tendinopathy: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Orthop Traumatol Surg Res; Jun 2020.
1255. MacDonald, Peter, Verhulst, Fleur, McRae, Sheila, Old, Jason, Stranges, Greg,
Dubberley, Jamie, Mascarenhas, Randy, Koenig, James, Leiter, Jeff, Nassar, Mark. Biceps
tenodesis versus tenotomy in the treatment of lesions of the long head of the biceps tendon
in patients undergoing arthroscopic shoulder surgery: a prospective double-blinded
randomized controlled trial. The American journal of sports medicine; 2020.
1256. Beach, ZM,et al. Biceps tenotomy in the presence of a supraspinatus tear alters the
adjacent intact tendons and glenoid cartilage. Journal of Biomechanics; 2017.
1257. De Carli, A et al. Reparable rotator cuff tears with concomitant long-head biceps lesions:
tenotomy or tenotomy/tenodesis?. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc; 2014.
1258. Friedman, JL,et al. Biceps tenotomy versus tenodesis in active patients younger than 55
years is there a difference in strength and outcomes?. Orthopaedic Journal of Sports Medicine;
2015.
1259. Galasso, O.,et al. Tenotomy versus tenodesis in the treatment of the. BMC
Musculoskelet Disord; 2012.
1260. Hassan, S, V, Patel. Biceps tenodesis versus biceps tenotomy for biceps tendinitis
without rotator cuff tears. Journal of Clinical Orthopaedics and Trauma; 2019.
1261. Meeks, BD,et al.,. Patient satisfaction after biceps tenotomy. Orthopaedic Journal of
Sports Medicine; 2017.
1262. Slenker, NR,et al. Biceps Tenotomy Versus Tenodesis: Clinical Outcomes. Journal of
Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery; 2012.
1263. van Deurzen, DF,et al. Long head BIceps TEnodesis or tenotomy in arthroscopic rotator
cuff repair: BITE study protocol. BMC Musculoskelet Disord; 2016.
1264. Wittstein, JR,et al. Isokinetic strength, endurance, and subjective outcomes after biceps
tenotomy versus tenodesis: A postoperative study. American Journal of Sports Medicine;
2011.
1265. Dakin, Paula, DiMartino, Stephen J, Gao, Haitao, Maloney, Jennifer, Kivitz, Alan J,
Schnitzer, Thomas J, Stahl, Neil, Yancopoulos, George D, Geba, Gregory P. The Efficacy,
Tolerability, and Joint Safety of Fasinumab in Osteoarthritis Pain: A Phase IIb/III Double‐Blind,
Placebo‐Controlled, Randomized Clinical Trial. Arthritis &amp; Rheumatology; 2019.
1266. Schnitzer, TJ, Marks, JA. A systematic review of the efficacy and general safety of
antibodies to NGF in the treatment of OA of the hip or knee. Osteoarthritis and cartilage;
2015.
1267. Abhishek, A., Doherty, M. Diagnosis and clinical presentation of osteoarthritis. Rheum
Dis Clin North Am; Feb 2013.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

774

1268. Anthony Ratcliffe, PhD, Evan L. Flatow, MD, Neil Roth, MD, Sued-Nejad, Fatemeh, and
Louis U. Bigliani, MD. Biochemical Markers in Synovial Fluid Identify Early Osteoarthritis of the
Glenohumeral Joint. Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research; 1996.
1269. Bijlsma, Johannes W. J., Berenbaum, Francis, Lafeber, Floris P. J. G. Osteoarthritis: an
update with relevance for clinical practice. The Lancet; 2011.
1270. Ganguly, A. Levels of C-reactive protein, creatine kinase-muscle and aldolase A are
suitable biomarkers to detect the risk factors for osteoarthritic disorders: A novel diagnostic
protocol. Caspian J Intern Med; Winter 2019.
1271. Hussein, M. R., Fathi, N. A., El-Din, A. M., Hassan, H. I., Abdullah, F., Al-Hakeem, E.,
Backer, E. A. Alterations of the CD4(+), CD8 (+) T cell subsets, interleukins-1beta, IL-10, IL-17,
tumor necrosis factor-alpha and soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 in rheumatoid
arthritis and osteoarthritis: preliminary observations. Pathol Oncol Res; Sep 2008.
1272. Janet Cushnaghan, Paul Dieppe. Study of 500 patients with limb joint osteoarthritis. I.
Analysis by age, sex, and distribution of symptomatic joint sites. Annals of the Rheumatic
Diseases; 1991.
1273. Sinusas, Keith. Osteoarthritis: diagnosis and treatment. American family physician;
2012.
1274. Nelson, A. E., Smith, M. W., Golightly, Y. M., Jordan, J. M. &quot;Generalized
osteoarthritis&quot;: a systematic review. Semin Arthritis Rheum; Jun 2014.
1275. Noh, K. C., Park, S. H., Yang, C. J., Lee, G. W., Kim, M. K., Kang, Y. H. Involvement of
synovial matrix degradation and angiogenesis in oxidative stress-exposed degenerative
rotator cuff tears with osteoarthritis. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jan 2018.
1276. Goldberg RL, et al. Elevated plasma levels of hyaluronate in patients with osteoarthritis
and rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis and Rheumatism; 1991.
1277. Siebuhr, A. S., Bay-Jensen, A. C., Jordan, J. M., Kjelgaard-Petersen, C. F., Christiansen,
C., Abramson, S. B., Attur, M., Berenbaum, F., Kraus, V., Karsdal, M. A. Inflammation (or
synovitis)-driven osteoarthritis: an opportunity for personalizing prognosis and treatment?.
Scand J Rheumatol; 2016.
1278. Taruc-Uy, R. L., Lynch, S. A. Diagnosis and treatment of osteoarthritis. Prim Care; Dec
2013.
1279. Linke, Philip M, Zemke, Katrin, Ecker, Niklas Unter, Neumann, Joerg, Werner, Andreas
W. Standard radiological classification of glenohumeral osteoarthritis does not correlate with
the complexity of the arthritic glenoid deformity. Archives of Orthopaedic and Trauma
Surgery; 2021.
1280. Moor, BK, Bouaicha, S, Rothenfluh, DA, Sukthankar, A, Gerber, C. Is there an association
between the individual anatomy of the scapula and the development of rotator cuff tears or
osteoarthritis of the glenohumeral joint? A radiological study of the critical shoulder angle.
The bone &amp; joint journal; 2013.
1281. Smith, Geoffrey CS, Liu, Victor, Lam, Patrick H. The critical shoulder angle shows a
reciprocal change in magnitude when evaluating symptomatic full-thickness rotator cuff tears
versus primary glenohumeral osteoarthritis as compared with control subjects: A systematic

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

775

review and meta-analysis. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery;
2020.
1282. Atkinson, MH. Osteoarthrosis. Can Fam Physician; 1984.
1283. Radiology, American,College,of. ACR Appropriateness Criteria® Shoulder Pain–
Traumatic. https://acsearch. acr. org/docs/69433/Narrative/; 2017.
1284. Radiology, American,College,of. ACR Appropriateness Criteria® Shoulder Pain–
Atraumatic. https://acsearch. acr. org/docs/3101482/Narrative/; 2018.
1285. Coscia, Atticus C, Matar, Robert N, Espinal, Emil E, Shah, Nihar S, Grawe, Brian M. Does
Preoperative Diagnosis Impact Patient Outcomes Following Reverse Total Shoulder
Arthroplasty? A Systematic Review. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery; 2020.
1286. Hayes, Meredith L, Collins, Mark S, Morgan, Joseph A, Wenger, Doris E, Dahm, Diane L.
Efficacy of diagnostic magnetic resonance imaging for articular cartilage lesions of the
glenohumeral joint in patients with instability. Skeletal radiology; 2010.
1287. Hurley, John A, Anderson, Thomas E. Shoulder arthroscopy: its role in evaluating
shoulder disorders in the athlete. The American journal of sports medicine; 1990.
1288. Kappe, Thomas, Elsharkawi, Mohammed, Flören, Markus, Reichel, Heiko, Cakir, Balkan.
Plain radiographs have limited sensitivity for glenohumeral cartilage lesions. Orthopedics
(Online); 2010.
1289. Lecouvet, Frédéric E, Dorzée, Benjamin, Dubuc, Jean E, Berg, Bruno C Vande, Jamart,
Jacques, Malghem, Jacques. Cartilage lesions of the glenohumeral joint: diagnostic
effectiveness of multidetector spiral CT arthrography and comparison with arthroscopy.
European radiology; 2007.
1290. Omoumi, Patrick, Rubini, Alexandra, Dubuc, Jean-Emile, Berg, Bruno C Vande, Lecouvet,
Frédéric E. Diagnostic performance of CT-arthrography and 1. 5 T MR-arthrography for the
assessment of glenohumeral joint cartilage: a comparative study with arthroscopic
correlation. European radiology; 2015.
1291. Brenner, Arnold I, Koshy, June, Morey, Jose, Lin, Cheryl, DiPoce, Jason. The bone scan.
Seminars in nuclear medicine; 2012.
1292. Lee, Jeong Won, Jung, Ki Jin, Lee, Sang Mi, Chang, Sung Hae. Clinical Use of Quantitative
Analysis of Bone Scintigraphy to Assess the Involvement of Arthritis Diseases in Patients with
Joint Symptoms. Diagnostics; 2020.
1293. Mazzuca, Steven A, Brandt, Kenneth D, Schauwecker, Donald S, Buckwalter, Kenneth A,
Katz, Barry P, Meyer, Joan M, Lane, Kathleen A. Bone scintigraphy is not a better predictor of
progression of knee osteoarthritis than Kellgren and Lawrence grade. The Journal of
rheumatology; 2004.
1294. Omoumi, Patrick, Mercier, Gustavo A, Lecouvet, Frédéric, Simoni, Paolo, Berg, Bruno C
Vande. CT arthrography, MR arthrography, PET, and scintigraphy in osteoarthritis. Radiologic
Clinics; 2009.
1295. Bouaicha, Samy, Ehrmann, Christine, Slankamenac, Ksenija, Regan, William D, Moor,
Beat K. Comparison of the critical shoulder angle in radiographs and computed tomography.
Skeletal radiology; 2014.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

776

1296. Scalise, Jason J, Codsi, Michael J, Bryan, Jason, Brems, John J, Iannotti, Joseph P. The
influence of three-dimensional computed tomography images of the shoulder in preoperative
planning for total shoulder arthroplasty. JBJS; 2008.
1297. Lee, Shi-Uk, Lang, Philipp. MR and MR arthrography to identify degenerative and
posttraumatic diseases in the shoulder joint. European journal of radiology; 2000.
1298. Stein, Beth E Shubin, Wiater, J Michael, Pfaff, H Charles, Bigliani, Louis U, Levine, William
N. Detection of acromioclavicular joint pathology in asymptomatic shoulders with magnetic
resonance imaging. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2001.
1299. Bradley, Michael P, Tung, Glenn, Green, Andrew. Overutilization of shoulder magnetic
resonance imaging as a diagnostic screening tool in patients with chronic shoulder pain.
Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2005.
1300. Guermazi, Ali, Hunter, David J, Roemer, Frank W. Plain radiography and magnetic
resonance imaging diagnostics in osteoarthritis: validated staging and scoring. JBJS; 2009.
1301. Choo, Hye Jung, Lee, Sun Joo, Kim, Jung Han, Cha, Seong Sook, Park, Young Mi, Park, Ji
Sung, Lee, Jun Woo, Oh, Minkyung. Can symptomatic acromioclavicular joints be
differentiated from asymptomatic acromioclavicular joints on 3-T MR imaging?. European
journal of radiology; 2013.
1302. Raymond, Antony C, McCann, Philip A, Sarangi, Partha P. Magnetic resonance scanning
vs axillary radiography in the assessment of glenoid version for osteoarthritis. Journal of
shoulder and elbow surgery; 2013.
1303. Spiegl, Ulrich J, Horan, Marilee P, Smith, Sean W, Ho, Charles P, Millett, Peter J. The
critical shoulder angle is associated with rotator cuff tears and shoulder osteoarthritis and is
better assessed with radiographs over MRI. Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy;
2016.
1304. Lowe, Jeremiah T, Testa, Edward J, Li, Xinning, Miller, Suzanne, DeAngelis, Joseph P,
Jawa, Andrew. Magnetic resonance imaging is comparable to computed tomography for
determination of glenoid version but does not accurately distinguish between Walch B2 and
C classifications. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2017.
1305. Singh, Bijayendra, Gulihar, Abhinav, Bilagi, Praveen, Goyal, Arpit, Goyal, Pallavi, Bawale,
Rajesh, Pillai, Dilip. Magnetic resonance imaging scans are not a reliable tool for predicting
symptomatic acromioclavicular arthritis. Shoulder &amp; elbow; 2018.
1306. Veen, Egbert JD, Donders, Cornelia M, Westerbeek, Robin E, Derks, Rosalie PH,
Landman, Ellie BM, Koorevaar, Cornelis T. Predictive findings on magnetic resonance imaging
in patients with symptomatic acromioclavicular osteoarthritis. Journal of shoulder and elbow
surgery; 2018.
1307. Abdelzaher, Mohamed Gamal, Tharwat, Samar, AbdElkhalek, Ahmed, Abdelsalam,
Adel. Ultrasound versus magnetic resonance imaging in the evaluation of shoulder joint
pathologies in a cohort of rheumatoid arthritis patients. International journal of rheumatic
diseases; 2019.
1308. Jungmann, Pia M, Gersing, Alexandra S, Woertler, Klaus, Dietrich, Tobias J, Baum,
Thomas, Baumann, Frederic, Bensler, Susanne. Reliable semiquantitative whole‐joint MRI

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

777

score for the shoulder joint: The shoulder osteoarthritis severity (SOAS) score. Journal of
Magnetic Resonance Imaging; 2019.
1309. Wuennemann, Felix, Kintzelé, Laurent, Braun, Alexander, Zeifang, Felix, Maier, Michael
W, Burkholder, Iris, Weber, Marc-André, Kauczor, Hans-Ulrich, Rehnitz, Christoph. 3-T T2
mapping magnetic resonance imaging for biochemical assessment of normal and damaged
glenoid cartilage: a prospective arthroscopy-controlled study. Scientific Reports; 2020.
1310. Badet, R, Boileau, P, Noel, E, Walch, G. Arthrography and computed arthrotomography
study of seventy patients with primary glenohumeral osteoarthritis. Revue du rhumatisme
(English ed.); 1995.
1311. Catalano, Onofrio A, Manfredi, Riccardo, Vanzulli, Angelo, Tomei, Ernesto, Napolitano,
Marcelo, Esposito, Andrea, Resnick, Donald. MR arthrography of the glenohumeral joint:
modified posterior approach without imaging guidance. Radiology; 2007.
1312. Vahlensieck, Martin, Peterfy, Charles G, Wischer, Thorsten, Sommer, Thorsten, Lang,
Philipp, Schlippert, Ulrich, Genant, Harry K, Schild, Hans H. Indirect MR arthrography:
optimization and clinical applications. Radiology; 1996.
1313. Guntern, Daniel V, Pfirrmann, Christian WA, Schmid, Marius R, Zanetti, Marco, Binkert,
Christoph A, Schneeberger, Alberto G, Hodler, Juerg. Articular cartilage lesions of the
glenohumeral joint: diagnostic effectiveness of MR arthrography and prevalence in patients
with subacromial impingement syndrome. Radiology; 2003.
1314. Saqib, R, Harris, J, Funk, L. Comparison of magnetic resonance arthrography with
arthroscopy for imaging of shoulder injuries: retrospective study. The Annals of The Royal
College of Surgeons of England; 2017.
1315. Iagnocco, Annamaria. Imaging the joint in osteoarthritis: a place for ultrasound?. Best
Practice &amp; Research Clinical Rheumatology; 2010.
1316. Hanly, JG,Barnes,DC,Mitchell,MJ,et al. Single photon emission computed tomography
in the diagnosis of inflammatory spondyloarthropathie. J Rheumatol; 1993.
1317. Nguyen, Brian J, Burt, Ashley, Baldassare, Randall L, Smitaman, Edward, Morshedi,
Maud, Kao, Steven, Chang, Eric Y, Obrzut, Sebastian. The prognostic and diagnostic value of
FDG PET/CT for assessment of symptomatic osteoarthritis. Nuclear medicine
communications; 2018.
1318. Wandler, Eric, Kramer, Elissa L, Sherman, Orrin, Babb, James, Scarola, Jean, Rafii,
Mahvash. Diffuse FDG shoulder uptake on PET is associated with clinical findings of
osteoarthritis. American Journal of Roentgenology; 2005.
1319. David H. Sikesa, Naurang M. Agrawalb,William W. Zhaoc,Jeffrey D. Kentc,, Verburgc,
David,P.,Reckerc,and,Kenneth,M. Gastrointestinal Toxicity with Celecoxib vs Nonsteroidal
Anti-inflammatory Drugs for Osteoarthritis and Rheumatoid Arthritis. JAMA; 2000.
1320. David H. Sikesa, Naurang M. Agrawalb,William W. Zhaoc,Jeffrey D. Kentc,, Verburgc,
David,P.,Reckerc,and,Kenneth,M. Incidence of gastroduodenal ulcers associated with
valdecoxib compared with that of ibuprofen and diclofenac in patients with osteoarthritis.
2002.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

778

1321. Derry, S., Wiffen, P. J., Kalso, E. A., Bell, R. F., Aldington, D., Phillips, T., Gaskell, H.,
Moore, R. A. Topical analgesics for acute and chronic pain in adults - an overview of Cochrane
Reviews. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; May 12 2017.
1322. Gotzche, Peter,C. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. BMJ; 2000.
1323. Jadhav, M. P., Jadhav, P. M., Mutke, A. P., Sonawane, S. D., Patil, B. D., Naik, N. B.,
Sonawale, A. S. A prospective observational study to assess quality of life and prescription
pattern in osteoarthritis patients at tertiary health centre in Mumbai. Indian J Med Sci; Feb
2011.
1324. James F. Fries, Bonnie Bruce. Rates of Serious Gastrointestinal Events from Low Dose
Use of Acetylsalicylic Acid, Acetaminophen, and Ibuprofen in Patients with Osteoarthritis and
Rheumatoid Arthritis. The Journal of Rhematology; 2003.
1325. Jordan, Robert W., Kelly, Cormac P. Management of glenohumeral arthritis in the young
patient – A systematic review. Journal of Arthroscopy and Joint Surgery; 2019.
1326. Massey, T., Derry, S., Moore, R. A., McQuay, H. J. Topical NSAIDs for acute pain in adults.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev; Jun 16 2010.
1327. MCCleane, Gary. The addition of piroxicam to topically applied glyceryl trinitrate
enhances its analgesic effect in musculoskeletal pain: a randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled study. The Pain Clinic; 2000.
1328. Moore, R. A., Wiffen, P. J., Derry, S., Maguire, T., Roy, Y. M., Tyrrell, L. Non-prescription
(OTC) oral analgesics for acute pain - an overview of Cochrane reviews. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev; Nov 4 2015.
1329. Millett, P. J., Gobezie, R, Boykin, R. E. Shoulder Osteoarthritis: Diagnosis and
Management. 2008.
1330. Raffaeli, W., Pari, C., Corvetta, A., Sarti, D., Di Sabatino, V., Biasi, G., Galeazzi, M.
Oxycodone/acetaminophen at low dosage: an alternative pain treatment for patients with
rheumatoid arthritis. J Opioid Manag; Jan-Feb 2010.
1331. Richy, F., Scarpignato, C., Lanas, A., Reginster, J. Y. Efficacy and safety of piroxicam
revisited. A global meta-analysis of randomised clinical trials. Pharmacol Res; Oct 2009.
1332. Roland W. Moskowitz, Theodore A. Blaine. An Overview of Treatment Options for
Persistent Shoulder Pain. A Supplement to the American Journal of Orthopedics; 2005.
1333. Sardana, V., Burzynski, J., Hasan, K., Zalzal, P. Are non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
injections an alternative to steroid injections for musculoskeletal pain?: A systematic review.
J Orthop; Sep 2018.
1334. Taylor, R. S., Fotopoulos, G., Maibach, H. Safety profile of topical diclofenac: a metaanalysis of blinded, randomized, controlled trials in musculoskeletal conditions. Curr Med Res
Opin; Mar 2011.
1335. Towheed, T. E., Maxwell, L., Judd, M. G., Catton, M., Hochberg, M. C., Wells, G.
Acetaminophen for osteoarthritis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; Jan 25 2006.
1336. van der Windt, D. A., van der Heijden, G. J., Scholten, R. J., Koes, B. W., Bouter, L. M.
The efficacy of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) for shoulder complaints. A
systematic review. J Clin Epidemiol; May 1995.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

779

1337. Chen, Y-F, Jobanputra, P, Barton, P, S, Bryan, Fry-Smith, A, Harris, G, Taylor, RS.
Cyclooxygenase-2 selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (etodolac, meloxicam,
celecoxib,rofecoxib, etoricoxib, valdecoxib and lumiracoxib) for osteoarthritis and
rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic review and economic evaluation. 2008.
1338. Yelland, M. J., Nikles, C. J., McNairn, N., Del Mar, C. B., Schluter, P. J., Brown, R. M.
Celecoxib compared with sustained-release paracetamol for osteoarthritis: a series of n-of-1
trials. Rheumatology (Oxford); Jan 2007.
1339. Zacher, J., Altman, R., Bellamy, N., Bruhlmann, P., Da Silva, J., Huskisson, E., Taylor, R.
S. Topical diclofenac and its role in pain and inflammation: an evidence-based review. Curr
Med Res Opin; Apr 2008.
1340. Diamond, H. S. Double-blind crossover study of fenoprofen and aspirin in osteoarthritis.
J Rheumatol; 1976.
1341. Bellamy, N., Bensen, W. G., Beaulieu, A., Siminovitch, K. A., Kraag, G. R., Lussier, A.,
Ahmad, S., Khanna, V. N., Davis, P., Bell, M. J., et al. . A multicenter study of nabumetone and
diclofenac SR in patients with osteoarthritis. J Rheumatol; May 1995.
1342. Bullock, Garrett S, Garrigues, Grant E, Ledbetter, Leila, Kennedy, June. A systematic
review of proposed rehabilitation guidelines following anatomic and reverse shoulder
arthroplasty. journal of orthopaedic &amp; sports physical therapy; 2019.
1343. Moore, M. E., Berk, S. N. Acupuncture for chronic shoulder pain. An experimental study
with attention to the role of placebo and hypnotic susceptibility. Ann Intern Med; Apr 1976.
1344. Vickers, Andrew J, Cronin, Angel M, Maschino, Alexandra C, Lewith, George,
MacPherson, Hugh, Foster, Nadine E, Sherman, Karen J, Witt, Claudia M, Linde, Klaus,
Acupuncture Trialists' Collaboration, for the. Acupuncture for chronic pain: individual patient
data meta-analysis. Archives of internal medicine; 2012.
1345. Brantingham, James W, Parkin-Smith, Gregory, Cassa, Tammy Kay, Globe, Gary A,
Globe, Denise, Pollard, Henry, deLuca, Katie, Jensen, Muffit, Mayer, Stephan, Korporaal,
Charmaine. Full kinetic chain manual and manipulative therapy plus exercise compared with
targeted manual and manipulative therapy plus exercise for symptomatic osteoarthritis of the
hip: a randomized controlled trial. Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation; 2012.
1346. Minkalis, Amy L, Vining, Robert D, Long, Cynthia R, Hawk, Cheryl, de Luca, Katie. A
systematic review of thrust manipulation for non-surgical shoulder conditions. Chiropractic
&amp; manual therapies; 2017.
1347. Altınbilek, Turgay, Murat, Sadiye, Yumuşakhuylu, Yasemin, İçağasıoğlu, Afitap.
Osteopathic manipulative treatment improves function and relieves pain in knee
osteoarthritis: A single-blind, randomized-controlled trial. Turkish journal of physical medicine
and rehabilitation; 2018.
1348. Brantingham, James W, Cassa, Tammy Kay, Bonnefin, Debra, Jensen, Muffit, Globe,
Gary, Hicks, Marian, Korporaal, Charmaine. Manipulative therapy for shoulder pain and
disorders: expansion of a systematic review. Journal of manipulative and physiological
therapeutics; 2011.
1349. Brosseau, Lucie, Wells, George A, Pugh, Arlanna G, Smith, Christine AM, Rahman,
Prinon, Àlvarez Gallardo, Inmaculada C, Toupin-April, Karine, Loew, Laurianne, De Angelis,

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

780

Gino, Cavallo, Sabrina. Ottawa Panel evidence-based clinical practice guidelines for
therapeutic exercise in the management of hip osteoarthritis. Clinical rehabilitation; 2016.
1350. Lin, Ivan, Wiles, Louise, Waller, Rob, Goucke, Roger, Nagree, Yusuf, Gibberd, Michael,
Straker, Leon, Maher, Chris G, O’Sullivan, Peter PB. What does best practice care for
musculoskeletal pain look like? Eleven consistent recommendations from high-quality clinical
practice guidelines: systematic review. British journal of sports medicine; 2020.
1351. Brosseau, Lucie, Yonge, KA, Welch, Vivian, Marchand, S, Judd, Maria, Wells, George A,
Tugwell, Peter. Thermotherapy for treatment of osteoarthritis. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews; 2003.
1352. Collins, Natalie J, Hart, Harvi F, Mills, Kathryn AG. Osteoarthritis year in review 2018:
rehabilitation and outcomes. Osteoarthritis and Cartilage; 2019.
1353. Sefton, JoEllen M, Yarar, Ceren, Carpenter, David M, Berry, Jack W. Physiological and
clinical changes after therapeutic massage of the neck and shoulders. Manual Therapy; 2011.
1354. Patterson, Abbey, Dickerson, Clark R, Ribeiro, Daniel C. The Effect of Shoulder
Mobilization on Scapular and Shoulder Muscle Activity During Resisted Shoulder Abduction:
A Crossover Study of Asymptomatic Individuals. Journal of Manipulative and Physiological
Therapeutics; 2020.
1355. Adegoke, BOA, Gbeminiyi, MO. Efficacy of ice and shortwave diathermy in the
management of osteoarthritis on the knee-A preliminary. African Journal of Biomedical
Research; 2004.
1356. Rabini, A., Piazzini, D. B., Bertolini, C., Deriu, L., Saccomanno, M. F., Santagada, D. A.,
Sgadari, A., Bernabei, R., Fabbriciani, C., Marzetti, E., Milano, G. Effects of local microwave
diathermy on shoulder pain and function in patients with rotator cuff tendinopathy in
comparison to subacromial corticosteroid injections: a single-blind randomized trial. J Orthop
Sports Phys Ther; Apr 2012.
1357. Boyaci, Ahmet, Tutoglu, Ahmet, Boyaci, Nurefsan, Aridici, Rifat, Koca, Irfan. Comparison
of the efficacy of ketoprofen phonophoresis, ultrasound, and short-wave diathermy in knee
osteoarthritis. Rheumatology international; 2013.
1358. Kim, Gook-Joo, Choi, Jioun, Lee, Sangyong, Jeon, Chunbae, Lee, Kwansub. The effects
of high intensity laser therapy on pain and function in patients with knee osteoarthritis.
Journal of physical therapy science; 2016.
1359. White, Paul F, Lazo, Ofelia Loani Elvir, Galeas, Lidia, Cao, Xuezhao. Use of
electroanalgesia and laser therapies as alternatives to opioids for acute and chronic pain
management. F1000Research; 2017.
1360. Papadopoulos, Emmanuel S, Mani, Raj. The role of ultrasound therapy in the
management of musculoskeletal soft tissue pain. The International Journal of Lower Extremity
Wounds; 2020.
1361. Valdes, Kristin, Marik, Tambra. A systematic review of conservative interventions for
osteoarthritis of the hand. Journal of Hand Therapy; 2010.
1362. Huang, Z, Chen, J, Ma, J, Shen, B, Pei, F, Kraus, VB. Effectiveness of low-level laser
therapy in patients with knee osteoarthritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Osteoarthritis and cartilage; 2015.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

781

1363. Mazzola, Anthony, Spinner, David. Ultrasound-Guided Peripheral Nerve Stimulation for
Shoulder Pain: Anatomic Review and Assessment of the Current Clinical Evidence. Pain
Physician; 2020.
1364. O'Leary, Helen, Smart, Keith M, Moloney, Niamh A, Doody, Catherine M. Nervous
system sensitization as a predictor of outcome in the treatment of peripheral musculoskeletal
conditions: a systematic review. Pain practice; 2017.
1365. Nguyen, Jean-Paul, Dixneuf, Véronique, Esnaut, Julien, Moreno, Alcira Suarez,
Malineau, Catherine, Nizard, Julien, Lefaucheur, Jean-Pascal. The value of high-frequency
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation of the motor cortex to treat central pain
sensitization associated with knee osteoarthritis. Frontiers in neuroscience; 2019.
1366. Paolucci, Teresa, Pezzi, Letizia, Centra, Antonello Marco, Giannandrea, Niki, Bellomo,
Rosa Grazia, Saggini, Raoul. Electromagnetic Field Therapy: A Rehabilitative Perspective in the
Management of Musculoskeletal Pain–A Systematic Review. Journal of Pain Research; 2020.
1367. Park, Ki Deok, Kim, Tai Kon, Lee, Jihae, Lee, Woo Yong, Ahn, Jae Ki, Park, Yongbum.
Palpation Versus Ultrasound-Guided Acromioclavicular Joint Intra-articular Corticosteroid
Injections: A Retrospective Comparative Clinical Study. Pain Physician; 2015.
1368. Ayub, Shazeen, Kaur, Jaspreet, Hui, Michelle, Espahbodi, Shima, Hall, Michelle, Doherty,
Michael, Zhang, Weiya. Efficacy and safety of multiple intra-articular corticosteroid injections
for osteoarthritis—a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials and
observational studies. Rheumatology; 2021.
1369. Caglar-Yagci H, Unsal S,Yagci I,Dulgeroglu D,Ozel S. Safety and efficacy of ultrasoundguided intra-articular hylan G-F 20 injection in osteoarthritis of the hip: a pilot study.
Rheumatol Int; 2005.
1370. Tikiz, C., Unlu, Z., Sener, A., Efe, M., Tuzun, C. Comparison of the efficacy of lower and
higher molecular weight viscosupplementation in the treatment of hip osteoarthritis. Clin
Rheumatol; Jun 2005.
1371. van den Bekerom, M. P., Lamme, B., Sermon, A., Mulier, M. What is the evidence for
viscosupplementation in the treatment of patients with hip osteoarthritis? Systematic review
of the literature. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg; Aug 2008.
1372. Dagenais, S. Intra-articular hyaluronic acid (viscosupplementation) for hip
osteoarthritis. Issues Emerg Health Technol; May 2007.
1373. Blaine, T., Moskowitz, R., Udell, J., Skyhar, M., Levin, R., Friedlander, J., Daley, M.,
Altman, R. Treatment of persistent shoulder pain with sodium hyaluronate: a randomized,
controlled trial. A multicenter study. J Bone Joint Surg Am; May 2008.
1374. Kwon, Y. W., Eisenberg, G., Zuckerman, J. D. Sodium hyaluronate for the treatment of
chronic shoulder pain associated with glenohumeral osteoarthritis: a multicenter,
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; May 2013.
1375. Colen S, Geervliet P,Haverkamp D,Van Den Bekerom MP. Intra-articular infiltration
therapy for patients with glenohumeral osteoarthritis: A systematic review of the literature.
J Shoulder Surg; 2014.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

782

1376. Colen, Sascha, Haverkamp, Daniel, Mulier, Michiel, Van Den Bekerom, Michel PJ.
Hyaluronic Acid for the Treatment of Osteoarthritis in all Joints Except the Knee. BioDrugs;
2012.
1377. De Lucia, Orazio, Murgo, Antonella, Pregnolato, Francesca, Pontikaki, Irene, De Souza,
Mirian, Sinelli, Alessandro, Cimaz, Rolando, Caporali, Roberto. Hyaluronic Acid Injections in
the Treatment of Osteoarthritis Secondary to Primary Inflammatory Rheumatic Diseases: A
Systematic Review and Qualitative Synthesis. Advances in therapy; 2020.
1378. Di Giacomo, G, de Gasperis, N. Hyaluronic acid intra-articular injections in patients
affected by moderate to severe glenohumeral osteoarthritis: a prospective randomized study.
Joints; 2017.
1379. Reid, M Carrington. Viscosupplementation for osteoarthritis: a primer for primary care
physicians. Advances in therapy; 2013.
1380. Tran, Khai, Loshak, Hannah. Intra-articular hyaluronic acid for viscosupplementation in
osteoarthritis of the hand, shoulder, and temporomandibular joint: a review of clinical
effectiveness and safety. 2019.
1381. Godek, P., Szajkowski, S., Golicki, D. Evaluation of the Effectiveness of Orthokine
Therapy: Retrospective Analysis of 1000 Cases. Ortop Traumatol Rehabil; Apr 30 2020.
1382. Simon, M. J. K., Aartsen, V. E., Coghlan, J. A., Strahl, A., Bell, S. N. Shoulder injections
with autologous conditioned serum reduce pain and disability in glenohumeral osteoarthritis:
longitudinal observational study. ANZ J Surg; Feb 20 2021.
1383. Robinson, David M, Eng, Christine, Makovitch, Steven, Rothenberg, Joshua B, DeLuca,
Stephanie, Douglas, Stephanie, Civitarese, David, Borg-Stein, Joanne. Non-operative
orthobiologic use for rotator cuff disorders and glenohumeral osteoarthritis: A systematic
review. Journal of Back and Musculoskeletal Rehabilitation; 2020.
1384. Bishop, J. Y., Flatow, E. L. Management of glenohumeral arthritis: a role for
arthroscopy?. Orthop Clin North Am; Oct 2003.
1385. Guyette, T. M., Bae, H., Warren, R. F., Craig, E., Wickiewicz, T. L. Results of arthroscopic
subacromial decompression in patients with subacromial impingement and glenohumeral
degenerative joint disease. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jul-Aug 2002.
1386. Sperling, J. W., Steinmann, S. P., Cordasco, F. A., Henshaw, D. R., Coons, D. A., Burkhead,
W. Z. Shoulder arthritis in the young adult: arthroscopy to arthroplasty. Instr Course Lect;
2006.
1387. Arner, Justin W, Elrick, Bryant P, Nolte, Philip-C, Haber, Daniel B, Horan, Marilee P,
Millett, Peter J. Survivorship and Patient-Reported Outcomes After Comprehensive
Arthroscopic Management of Glenohumeral Osteoarthritis: Minimum 10-Year Follow-up. The
American Journal of Sports Medicine; 2021.
1388. Hartzler, Robert U, Melapi, Sabelo, de Beer, Joe F, Burkhart, Stephen S. Arthroscopic
joint preservation in severe glenohumeral arthritis using interpositional human dermal
allograft. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery; 2017.
1389. Millett, P. J., Horan, M. P., Pennock, A. T., Rios, D. Comprehensive Arthroscopic
Management (CAM) procedure: clinical results of a joint-preserving arthroscopic treatment
for young, active patients with advanced shoulder osteoarthritis. Arthroscopy; Mar 2013.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

783

1390. Mitchell, Justin J, Warner, Brent T, Horan, Marilee P, Raynor, M Brett, Menge, Travis J,
Greenspoon, Joshua A, Millett, Peter J. Comprehensive arthroscopic management of
glenohumeral osteoarthritis: preoperative factors predictive of treatment failure. The
American journal of sports medicine; 2017.
1391. Porcellini, Giuseppe, Merolla, Giovanni, Campi, Fabrizio, Pellegrini, Andrea, Bodanki,
Chandra Sekhar, Paladini, Paolo. Arthroscopic treatment of early glenohumeral arthritis.
Journal of Orthopaedics and Traumatology; 2013.
1392. Skelley, Nathan W, Namdari, Surena, Chamberlain, Aaron M, Keener, Jay D, Galatz,
Leesa M, Yamaguchi, Ken. Arthroscopic debridement and capsular release for the treatment
of shoulder osteoarthritis. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery;
2015.
1393. Van Thiel, Geoffrey S, Sheehan, Steven, Frank, Rachel M, Slabaugh, Mark, Cole, Brian J,
Nicholson, Gregory P, Romeo, Anthony A, Verma, Nikhil N. Retrospective analysis of
arthroscopic management of glenohumeral degenerative disease. Arthroscopy: The Journal
of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery; 2010.
1394. Weinstein, David M, Bucchieri, John S, Pollock, Roger G, Flatow, Evan L, Bigliani, Louis
U. Arthroscopic debridement of the shoulder for osteoarthritis. Arthroscopy: The Journal of
Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery; 2000.
1395. Williams, Brady T, Beletsky, Alexander, Kunze, Kyle N, Polce, Evan M, Cole, Brian J,
Verma, Nikhil N, Chahla, Jorge. Outcomes and survivorship after arthroscopic treatment of
glenohumeral arthritis: a systematic review. Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic &amp;
Related Surgery; 2020.
1396. Wolf, Megan R, Williams, Ariel A, Friedman, Jamie L, Shea, Kevin P. Arthroscopic
capsular release and debridement of painful shoulder osteoarthritis can improve symptoms
and delay arthroplasty: a mid-to long-term follow-up study. Seminars in Arthroplasty: JSES;
2021.
1397. Moseley, J. B., O'Malley, K., Petersen, N. J., Menke, T. J., Brody, B. A., Kuykendall, D. H.,
Hollingsworth, J. C., Ashton, C. M., Wray, N. P. A controlled trial of arthroscopic surgery for
osteoarthritis of the knee. N Engl J Med; Jul 11 2002.
1398. Mitchell, J. J., Horan, M. P., Greenspoon, J. A., Menge, T. J., Tahal, D. S., Millett, P. J.
Survivorship and Patient-Reported Outcomes After Comprehensive Arthroscopic
Management of Glenohumeral Osteoarthritis: Minimum 5-Year Follow-up. Am J Sports Med;
Dec 2016.
1399. Solomon, D. J., Navaie, M., Stedje-Larsen, E. T., Smith, J. C., Provencher, M. T.
Glenohumeral chondrolysis after arthroscopy: a systematic review of potential contributors
and causal pathways. Arthroscopy; Nov 2009.
1400. Freedman, B. A., Javernick, M. A., O'Brien, F. P., Ross, A. E., Doukas, W. C. Arthroscopic
versus open distal clavicle excision: comparative results at six months and one year from a
randomized, prospective clinical trial. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jul-Aug 2007.
1401. Berg, E. E., Ciullo, J. V. The SLAP lesion: a cause of failure after distal clavicle resection.
Arthroscopy; Feb 1997.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

784

1402. Bigliani, L. U., Nicholson, G. P., Flatow, E. L. Arthroscopic resection of the distal clavicle.
Orthop Clin North Am; Jan 1993.
1403. Cook, F. F., Tibone, J. E. The Mumford procedure in athletes. An objective analysis of
function. Am J Sports Med; Mar-Apr 1988.
1404. Corso, S. J., Furie, E. Arthroscopy of the acromioclavicular joint. Orthop Clin North Am;
Oct 1995.
1405. Flatow, E. L., Duralde, X. A., Nicholson, G. P., Pollock, R. G., Bigliani, L. U. Arthroscopic
resection of the distal clavicle with a superior approach. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jan-Feb 1995.
1406. Gartsman, GM. Arthroscopic resection of the acromioclavicular joint. Am J Sports Med;
1993.
1407. Lesko, P. D. Variation of the arthroscopic Mumford procedure for resecting the distal
clavicle. J South Orthop Assoc; Winter 2001.
1408. Levine, W. N., Barron, O. A., Yamaguchi, K., Pollock, R. G., Flatow, E. L., Bigliani, L. U.
Arthroscopic distal clavicle resection from a bursal approach. Arthroscopy; Jan-Feb 1998.
1409. Gurd, F. B. The treatment of complete dislocation of the outer end of the clavicle: an
hitherto undescribed operation. Ann Surg; Jun 1941.
1410. Mumford, EB. Acromioclavicular dislocation: a new operative treatment. The Journal of
Bone and Joint Surgery; 1941.
1411. Charron, K. M., Schepsis, A. A., Voloshin, I. Arthroscopic distal clavicle resection in
athletes: a prospective comparison of the direct and indirect approach. Am J Sports Med; Jan
2007.
1412. Flatow, E. L., Cordasco, F. A., Bigliani, L. U. Arthroscopic resection of the outer end of
the clavicle from a superior approach: a critical, quantitative, radiographic assessment of
bone removal. Arthroscopy; 1992.
1413. Chalmers, Peter N, Granger, Erin, Ross, Hunter, Burks, Robert T, Tashjian, Robert Z.
Preoperative factors associated with subsequent distal clavicle resection after rotator cuff
repair. Orthopaedic journal of sports medicine; 2019.
1414. Gokkus, K, Saylik, M, Atmaca, H, Sagtas, E, Aydin, AT. Limited distal clavicle excision of
acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis. Orthopaedics &amp; Traumatology: Surgery &amp;
Research; 2016.
1415. Kim, Jaehwa, Chung, Juhwan, Ok, Hyunsoo. Asymptomatic acromioclavicular joint
arthritis in arthroscopic rotator cuff tendon repair: a prospective randomized comparison
study. Archives of orthopaedic and trauma surgery; 2011.
1416. Rabalais, R David, McCarty, Eric. Surgical treatment of symptomatic acromioclavicular
joint problems: a systematic review. Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research (1976-2007);
2007.
1417. Razmjou, Helen, ElMaraghy, Amr, Dwyer, Tim, Fournier-Gosselin, Simon, Devereaux,
Moira, Holtby, Richard. Outcome of distal clavicle resection in patients with acromioclavicular
joint osteoarthritis and full-thickness rotator cuff tear. Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology,
Arthroscopy; 2015.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

785

1418. Matsen, F. A.,3rd. Early effectiveness of shoulder arthroplasty for patients who have
primary glenohumeral degenerative joint disease. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Feb 1996.
1419. Edwards, T Bradley, Boulahia, Aziz, Kempf, Jean-Francois, Boileau, Pascal, Nemoz,
Chantal, Walch, Gilles. The influence of rotator cuff disease on the results of shoulder
arthroplasty for primary osteoarthritis: results of a multicenter study. Jbjs; 2002.
1420. Fehringer, Edward V, Kopjar, Branko, Boorman, Richard S, Churchill, R Sean, Smith,
Kevin L, Matsen III, Frederick A. Characterizing the functional improvement after total
shoulder arthroplasty for osteoarthritis. JBJS; 2002.
1421. Godenèche, Arnaud, Boileau, Pascal, Favard, Luc, Le Huec, Jean-Charles, Lévigne,
Christophe, Nové-Josserand, Laurent, Walch, Gilles, Edwards, T Bradley. Prosthetic
replacement in the treatment of osteoarthritis of the shoulder: early results of 268 cases.
Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2002.
1422. Edwards, T. B., Kadakia, N. R., Boulahia, A., Kempf, J. F., Boileau, P., Nemoz, C., Walch,
G. A comparison of hemiarthroplasty and total shoulder arthroplasty in the treatment of
primary glenohumeral osteoarthritis: results of a multicenter study. J Shoulder Elbow Surg;
May-Jun 2003.
1423. Iannotti, Joseph P, Norris, Tom R. Influence of preoperative factors on outcome of
shoulder arthroplasty for glenohumeral osteoarthritis. Jbjs; 2003.
1424. Fama, Giuseppe, Edwards, T Bradley, Boulahia, Aziz, Kempf, Jean François, Boileau,
Pascal, Némoz, Chantal, Walch, Gilles. The role of concomitant biceps tenodesis in shoulder
arthroplasty for primary osteoarthritis: results of a multicentric study. Orthopedics; 2004.
1425. Sirveaux, F, Favard, L, Oudet, D, Huquet, D, Walch, G, Mole, D. Grammont inverted total
shoulder arthroplasty in the treatment of glenohumeral osteoarthritis with massive rupture
of the cuff: results of a multicentre study of 80 shoulders. The Journal of bone and joint
surgery. British volume; 2004.
1426. Bryant, Dianne, Litchfield, Robert, Sandow, Michael, Gartsman, Gary M, Guyatt,
Gordon, Kirkley, Alexandra. A comparison of pain, strength, range of motion, and functional
outcomes after hemiarthroplasty and total shoulder arthroplasty in patients with
osteoarthritis of the shoulder: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JBJS; 2005.
1427. Mileti, J, Sperling, JW, Cofield, RH, Harrington, JR, Hoskin, TL. Monoblock and modular
total shoulder arthroplasty for osteoarthritis. The Journal of bone and joint surgery. British
volume; 2005.
1428. Haines, JF, Trail, IA, Nuttall, D, Birch, A, Barrow, A. The results of arthroplasty in
osteoarthritis of the shoulder. The Journal of bone and joint surgery. British volume; 2006.
1429. Raiss, P, Aldinger, PR, Kasten, P, Rickert, M, Loew, M. Total shoulder replacement in
young and middle-aged patients with glenohumeral osteoarthritis. The Journal of bone and
joint surgery. British volume; 2008.
1430. Bartelt, Robert, Sperling, John W, Schleck, Cathy D, Cofield, Robert H. Shoulder
arthroplasty in patients aged fifty-five years or younger with osteoarthritis. Journal of
shoulder and elbow surgery; 2011.
1431. Litchfield, Robert B, McKee, Micheal D, Balyk, Robert, Mandel, Scott, Holtby, Richard,
Hollinshead, Robert, Drosdowech, Darren, Wambolt, S Elizabeth, Griffin, Sharon H,
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

786

McCormack, Robert. Cemented versus uncemented fixation of humeral components in total
shoulder arthroplasty for osteoarthritis of the shoulder: a prospective, randomized, doubleblind clinical trial—a JOINTs Canada Project. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2011.
1432. Singh, Jasvinder A, Sperling, John, Buchbinder, Rachelle, McMAKEN, KELLY. Surgery for
shoulder osteoarthritis: a Cochrane systematic review. The Journal of rheumatology; 2011.
1433. Young, A, Walch, G, Boileau, P, Favard, L, Gohlke, F, Loew, M, Molé, D. A multicentre
study of the long-term results of using a flat-back polyethylene glenoid component in
shoulder replacement for primary osteoarthritis. The Journal of bone and joint surgery. British
volume; 2011.
1434. Young, Allan A, Walch, Gilles, Pape, Guido, Gohlke, Frank, Favard, Luc. Secondary
rotator cuff dysfunction following total shoulder arthroplasty for primary glenohumeral
osteoarthritis: results of a multicenter study with more than five years of follow-up. JBJS;
2012.
1435. Duan, Xin, Zhang, Wei, Dong, Xingxing, Liu, Ming, Gao, Yu, Huang, Fuguo, Li, Jian, Xiang,
Zhou. Total shoulder arthroplasty versus hemiarthroplasty in patients with shoulder
osteoarthritis: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Seminars in arthritis and
rheumatism; 2013.
1436. Mizuno, Naoko, Denard, Patrick J, Raiss, Patric, Walch, Gilles. Reverse total shoulder
arthroplasty for primary glenohumeral osteoarthritis in patients with a biconcave glenoid.
JBJS; 2013.
1437. Sandow, Michael J, David, Huw, Bentall, Steven J. Hemiarthroplasty vs total shoulder
replacement for rotator cuff intact osteoarthritis: how do they fare after a decade?. Journal
of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2013.
1438. van den Bekerom, Michel PJ, Geervliet, Pieter C, Somford, Matthijs P, van den Borne,
Maaike PJ, Boer, Ronald. Total shoulder arthroplasty versus hemiarthroplasty for
glenohumeral arthritis: a systematic review of the literature at long-term follow-up.
International journal of shoulder surgery; 2013.
1439. Henry, Patrick, Razmjou, Helen, Dwyer, Tim, Shantz, Jesse A Slade, Holtby, Richard.
Relationship between probability of future shoulder arthroplasty and outcomes of
arthroscopic debridement in patients with advanced osteoarthritis of glenohumeral joint.
BMC musculoskeletal disorders; 2015.
1440. Steen, Brandon M, Cabezas, Andres F, Santoni, Brandon G, Hussey, Michael M, Cusick,
Michael C, Kumar, Avinash G, Frankle, Mark A. Outcome and value of reverse shoulder
arthroplasty for treatment of glenohumeral osteoarthritis: a matched cohort. Journal of
shoulder and elbow surgery; 2015.
1441. Levy, David M, Abrams, Geoffrey D, Harris, Joshua D, Bach Jr, Bernard R, Nicholson,
Gregory P, Romeo, Anthony A. Rotator cuff tears after total shoulder arthroplasty in primary
osteoarthritis: A systematic review. International journal of shoulder surgery; 2016.
1442. McFarland, Edward G, Huri, Gazi, Hyun, Yoon Suk, Petersen, Steve A, Srikumaran, Uma.
Reverse total shoulder arthroplasty without bone-grafting for severe glenoid bone loss in
patients with osteoarthritis and intact rotator cuff. JBJS; 2016.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

787

1443. Kooistra, Bauke W, Willems, W Jaap, Lemmens, Eelke, Hartel, Bas P, van den Bekerom,
Michel PJ, van Deurzen, Derek FP. Comparative study of total shoulder arthroplasty versus
total shoulder surface replacement for glenohumeral osteoarthritis with minimum 2-year
follow-up. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2017.
1444. Nicholson, Gregory P, Cvetanovich, Gregory L, Rao, Allison J, O'Donnell, Patrick.
Posterior glenoid bone grafting in total shoulder arthroplasty for osteoarthritis with severe
posterior glenoid wear. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2017.
1445. Ho, Jason C, Amini, Michael H, Entezari, Vahid, Jun, Bong Jae, Alolabi, Bashar, Ricchetti,
Eric T, Iannotti, Joseph P. Clinical and radiographic outcomes of a posteriorly augmented
glenoid component in anatomic total shoulder arthroplasty for primary osteoarthritis with
posterior glenoid bone loss. JBJS; 2018.
1446. Mahony, Gregory T, Werner, Brian C, Chang, Brenda, Grawe, Brian M, Taylor, Samuel
A, Craig, Edward V, Warren, Russell F, Dines, David M, Gulotta, Lawrence V. Risk factors for
failing to achieve improvement after anatomic total shoulder arthroplasty for glenohumeral
osteoarthritis. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2018.
1447. Merolla, Giovanni, Cerciello, Simone, Marenco, Stefano, Fabbri, Elisabetta, Paladini,
Paolo, Porcellini, Giuseppe. Comparison of shoulder replacement to treat osteoarthritis
secondary to instability surgery and primary osteoarthritis: a retrospective controlled study
of patient outcomes. International orthopaedics; 2018.
1448. Pandya, Jay, Johnson, Tamara, Low, Adrian K. Shoulder replacement for osteoarthritis:
a review of surgical management. Maturitas; 2018.
1449. Rasmussen, Jeppe Vejlgaard, Hole, R, Metlie, T, Brorson, Stig, Äärimaa, V, Demir, Yilmaz,
Salomonsson, Björn, Jensen, SL. Anatomical total shoulder arthroplasty used for
glenohumeral osteoarthritis has higher survival rates than hemiarthroplasty: a Nordic
registry-based study. Osteoarthritis and cartilage; 2018.
1450. Bruttel, Hendrik, Spranz, David M, Bülhoff, Matthias, Aljohani, Nasser, Wolf, Sebastian
I, Maier, Michael W. Comparison of glenohumeral and humerothoracical range of motion in
healthy controls, osteoarthritic patients and patients after total shoulder arthroplasty
performing different activities of daily living. Gait &amp; posture; 2019.
1451. Collin, Philippe, Hervé, Anthony, Walch, Gilles, Boileau, Pascal, Muniandy, Moganadass,
Chelli, Mickael. Mid-term results of reverse shoulder arthroplasty for glenohumeral
osteoarthritis with posterior glenoid deficiency and humeral subluxation. Journal of shoulder
and elbow surgery; 2019.
1452. Levine, William N, Munoz, Julianne, Hsu, Stephanie, Byram, Ian R, Bigliani, Louis U,
Ahmad, Christopher S, Kongmalai, Pinkawas, Shillingford, Jamal N. Subscapularis tenotomy
versus lesser tuberosity osteotomy during total shoulder arthroplasty for primary
osteoarthritis: a prospective, randomized controlled trial. Journal of shoulder and elbow
surgery; 2019.
1453. Neyton, Lionel, Kirsch, Jacob M, Collotte, Philippe, Collin, Philippe, Gossing, Louis, Chelli,
Mikael, Walch, Gilles. Mid-to long-term follow-up of shoulder arthroplasty for primary
glenohumeral osteoarthritis in patients aged 60 or under. Journal of shoulder and elbow
surgery; 2019.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

788

1454. Alikhah, Arad, Imiolczyk, Jan-Phillipp, Krukenberg, Anna, Scheibel, Markus. Screw
fixation in stemless shoulder arthroplasty for the treatment of primary osteoarthritis leads to
less osteolysis when compared to impaction fixation. BMC musculoskeletal disorders; 2020.
1455. Barret, Hugo, Gauci, Marc-Olivier, Langlais, Tristan, van der Meijden, Olivier, Tran,
Laurie, Boileau, Pascal. Pyrocarbon interposition shoulder arthroplasty in young arthritic
patients: a prospective observational study. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2020.
1456. Bender, Michael J, Morris, Brent J, Sheth, Mihir M, Laughlin, Mitzi S, Budeyri, Aydin, Le,
Ryan K, Elkousy, Hussein A, Edwards, T Bradley. Outcomes of total shoulder arthroplasty for
instability arthropathy with a prior coracoid transfer procedure: a retrospective review and
matched cohort. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2020.
1457. Kwak, Jae-Man, Kim, Hyojune, Sun, Yucheng, Kholinne, Erica, Koh, Kyoung Hwan, Jeon,
In-Ho. Arthroscopic osteocapsular arthroplasty for advanced-stage primary osteoarthritis of
the elbow using a computed tomography–based classification. Journal of shoulder and elbow
surgery; 2020.
1458. Ode, Gabriella E, Ling, Daphne, Finocchiaro, Anthony, Lai, Emily Ying, Taylor, Samuel A,
Dines, Joshua, Dines, David, Warren, Russell, Gulotta, Lawrence. Clinical characteristics and
patient-reported outcomes of total shoulder arthroplasty after anterior stabilization: a
retrospective matched control study. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery; 2020.
1459. Romeo, Anthony A, Erickson, Brandon J, Costouros, John, Long, Nathan, Klassen,
Jeffrey, Araghi, Arash, Brown, John, Setter, Kevin, Port, Joshua, Tyndall, William. Eclipse
stemless shoulder prosthesis vs. Univers II shoulder prosthesis: a multicenter, prospective
randomized controlled trial. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery; 2020.
1460. Wiater, J Michael, Levy, Jonathan C, Wright, Stephen A, Brockmeier, Stephen F, Duquin,
Thomas R, Wright, Jonathan O, Codd, Timothy P. Prospective, Blinded, Randomized
Controlled Trial of Stemless Versus Stemmed Humeral Components in Anatomic Total
Shoulder Arthroplasty: Results at Short-Term Follow-up. JBJS; 2020.
1461. Orfaly, R. M., Rockwood, C. A.,Jr., Esenyel, C. Z., Wirth, M. A. A prospective functional
outcome study of shoulder arthroplasty for osteoarthritis with an intact rotator cuff. J
Shoulder Elbow Surg; May-Jun 2003.
1462. Smith, K. L., Matsen, F. A.,3rd. Total shoulder arthroplasty versus hemiarthroplasty.
Current trends. Orthop Clin North Am; Jul 1998.
1463. Ballmer, Franz,T. Total shoulder arthroplasty: Some considerations related to glenoid
surface contact. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery; 1994.
1464. Neer, C. S.,2nd. Replacement arthroplasty for glenohumeral osteoarthritis. J Bone Joint
Surg Am; Jan 1974.
1465. Bell, S. N., Gschwend, N. Clinical experience with total arthroplasty and
hemiarthroplasty of the shoulder using the Neer prosthesis. Int Orthop; 1986.
1466. Cofield, Robert H. MD ,Peter J. Daly,MD. Total shoulder arthroplasty with a tissueingrowth glenoid component*. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 1992.
1467. Radnay, C. S., Setter, K. J., Chambers, L., Levine, W. N., Bigliani, L. U., Ahmad, C. S. Total
shoulder replacement compared with humeral head replacement for the treatment of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

789

primary glenohumeral osteoarthritis: a systematic review. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jul-Aug
2007.
1468. Parsons, I. M. th, Weldon, E. J.,3rd, Titelman, R. M., Smith, K. L. Glenohumeral arthritis
and its management. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am; May 2004.
1469. Weber, M., Berry, D. J., Harmsen, W. S. Total hip arthroplasty after operative treatment
of an acetabular fracture. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Sep 1998.
1470. Brostrom, L. A., Kronberg, M., Wallensten, R. Should the glenoid be replaced in shoulder
arthroplasty with an unconstrained Dana or St. Georg prosthesis?. Ann Chir Gynaecol; 1992.
1471. Amstutz, H. C., Thomas, B. J., Kabo, J. M., Jinnah, R. H., Dorey, F. J. The Dana total
shoulder arthroplasty. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Sep 1988.
1472. Torchia, M. E., Cofield, R. H., Settergren, C. R. Total shoulder arthroplasty with the Neer
prosthesis: long-term results. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Nov-Dec 1997.
1473. Cofield, R. H. Total shoulder arthroplasty with the Neer prosthesis. J Bone Joint Surg
Am; Jul 1984.
1474. Barrett, W. P., Franklin, J. L., Jackins, S. E., Wyss, C. R., Matsen, F. A.,3rd. Total shoulder
arthroplasty. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jul 1987.
1475. Clayton, M. L., Ferlic, D. C., Jeffers, P. D. Prosthetic arthroplasties of the shoulder. Clin
Orthop Relat Res; Apr 1982.
1476. Boyd, A. D.,Jr., Thomas, W. H., Scott, R. D., Sledge, C. B., Thornhill, T. S. Total shoulder
arthroplasty versus hemiarthroplasty. Indications for glenoid resurfacing. J Arthroplasty; Dec
1990.
1477. Norris, B. L., Lachiewicz, P. F. Modern cement technique and the survivorship of total
shoulder arthroplasty. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Jul 1996.
1478. Norris, T. R., Iannotti, J. P. Functional outcome after shoulder arthroplasty for primary
osteoarthritis: a multicenter study. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Mar-Apr 2002.
1479. Gartsman, G. M., Roddey, T. S., Hammerman, S. M. Shoulder arthroplasty with or
without resurfacing of the glenoid in patients who have osteoarthritis. J Bone Joint Surg Am;
Jan 2000.
1480. Blevins, F. T., Pollo, F. E., Torzilli, P. A., Warren, R. F. Effect of humeral head component
size on hemiarthroplasty translations and rotations. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Nov-Dec 1998.
1481. Fuerst, M., Fink, B., Ruther, W. The DUROM cup humeral surface replacement in
patients with rheumatoid arthritis. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Aug 2007.
1482. Burgess DL, McGrath MS,Bonutti PM,Marker DR,Delanois RE,Mont MA. Shoulder
Resurfacing. 2009.
1483. Ellenbecker, T. S., Bailie, D. S., Lamprecht, D. Humeral resurfacing hemiarthroplasty
with meniscal allograft in a young patient with glenohumeral osteoarthritis. J Orthop Sports
Phys Ther; May 2008.
1484. Burkhead WZ, Jr.,Hutton KS. Biologic resurfacing of the glenoid with hemiarthroplasty
of the shoulder. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; 1995.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

790

1485. Burkhead WZ, Jr.,Krishnan SG,Lin KC. Biologic resurfacing of the arthritic glenohumeral
joint: Historical review and current applications. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; 2007.
1486. Raiss, P., Aldinger, P. R., Kasten, P., Rickert, M., Loew, M. Humeral head resurfacing for
fixed anterior glenohumeral dislocation. Int Orthop; Apr 2009.
1487. Harryman DT, Sidles JA Harris SL Lippitt SB Matsen FA 3rd. he effect of articular
conformity and the size of the humeral head component on laxity and motion after
glenohumeral arthroplasty. A study in cadavera. J Bone Joint Surg Am; 1995.
1488. Thomas, S. R., Sforza, G., Levy, O., Copeland, S. A. Geometrical analysis of Copeland
surface replacement shoulder arthroplasty in relation to normal anatomy. J Shoulder Elbow
Surg; Mar-Apr 2005.
1489. Thomas, S. R., Wilson, A. J., Chambler, A., Harding, I., Thomas, M. Outcome of Copeland
surface replacement shoulder arthroplasty. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Sep-Oct 2005.
1490. Levy, O., Copeland, S. A. Cementless surface replacement arthroplasty of the shoulder.
5- to 10-year results with the Copeland mark-2 prosthesis. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Mar 2001.
1491. Levy, O., Copeland, S. A. Cementless surface replacement arthroplasty (Copeland CSRA)
for osteoarthritis of the shoulder. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; May-Jun 2004.
1492. Levy, O., Funk, L., Sforza, G., Copeland, S. A. Copeland surface replacement arthroplasty
of the shoulder in rheumatoid arthritis. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Mar 2004.
1493. Copeland, S. The continuing development of shoulder replacement: &quot;reaching the
surface&quot;. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Apr 2006.
1494. Savoie, F. H.,3rd, Brislin, K. J., Argo, D. Arthroscopic glenoid resurfacing as a surgical
treatment for glenohumeral arthritis in the young patient: midterm results. Arthroscopy; Aug
2009.
1495. Alund, M., Hoe-Hansen, C., Tillander, B., Heden, B. A., Norlin, R. Outcome after cup
hemiarthroplasty in the rheumatoid shoulder: a retrospective evaluation of 39 patients
followed for 2-6 years. Acta Orthop Scand; Apr 2000.
1496. Fink, B., Singer, J., Lamla, U., Ruther, W. Surface replacement of the humeral head in
rheumatoid arthritis. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg; Jul 2004.
1497. Buchner, M., Eschbach, N., Loew, M. Comparison of the short-term functional results
after surface replacement and total shoulder arthroplasty for osteoarthritis of the shoulder:
a matched-pair analysis. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg; Apr 2008.
1498. Scalise, JJ, Miniaci, A, Iannotti, JP. Resurfacing arthroplasty of the humerus: indications,
surgical technique, and clinical results. Tech Shoulder Elbow Surg; 2007.
1499. Misamore, GW. Management of osteoarthritis of the shoulder. Orthopaedic Knowledge
Update: Shoulder and Elbow; 1997.
1500. Harreld, K. L., Marulanda, G. A., Ulrich, S. D., Marker, D. R., Seyler, T. M., Mont, M. A.
Small-diameter percutaneous decompression for osteonecrosis of the shoulder. Am J Orthop
(Belle Mead NJ); Jul 2009.
1501. Ficat, RP. Idiopathic bone necrosis of the femoral head. Early diagnosis and treatment.
J Bone Joint Surg Br; 1985.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

791

1502. Woodhouse, C. F. Dynamic influences of vascular occlusion affecting the development
of avascular necrosis of the femoral head. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Jan-Feb 1964.
1503. Rosingh, G. E., Steendijk, R., van den Hooff, A. Consequences of avascular necrosis of
the femoral head in rabbits. A histological and radiological study. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Aug
1969.
1504. Sarris, I., Weiser, R., Sotereanos, D. G. Pathogenesis and treatment of osteonecrosis of
the shoulder. Orthop Clin North Am; Jul 2004.
1505. Jones, J. P.,Jr. Concepts of etiology and early pathogenesis of osteonecrosis. Instr Course
Lect; 1994.
1506. Hattrup, SJ,Cofield,RH. Osteonecrosis of the humeral head: relationship of disease
stage, extent, and cause to natural history. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; 1999.
1507. Volokh, K. Y., Yoshida, H., Leali, A., Fetto, J. F., Chao, E. Y. Prediction of femoral head
collapse in osteonecrosis. J Biomech Eng; Jun 2006.
1508. Cruess, R. L. Steroid-induced avascular necrosis of the head of the humerus. Natural
history and management. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Aug 1976.
1509. Usher, B. W.,Jr., Friedman, R. J. Steroid-induced osteonecrosis of the humeral head.
Orthopedics; Jan 1995.
1510. Loebenberg, M. I., Plate, A. M., Zuckerman, J. D. Osteonecrosis of the humeral head.
Instr Course Lect; 1999.
1511. Nixon, JE. Avascular necrosis of bone: a review. J R Soc Med; 1983.
1512. Pritchett, J. W. Statin therapy decreases the risk of osteonecrosis in patients receiving
steroids. Clin Orthop Relat Res; May 2001.
1513. Mankin, H. J. Nontraumatic necrosis of bone (osteonecrosis). N Engl J Med; May 28
1992.
1514. Mont, MA, Hungerford, DS. Non-traumatic avascular necrosis of the femoral head. J
Bone Joint Surg Am; 1995.
1515. Cruess, R. L. Corticosteroid-induced osteonecrosis of the humeral head. Orthop Clin
North Am; Oct 1985.
1516. Valencia, M. E., Barreiro, P., Soriano, V., Blanco, F., Moreno, V., Lahoz, J. G. Avascular
necrosis in HIV-infected patients receiving antiretroviral treatment: study of seven cases. HIV
Clin Trials; Mar-Apr 2003.
1517. Jones, L. C., Mont, M. A., Le, T. B., Petri, M., Hungerford, D. S., Wang, P., Glueck, C. J.
Procoagulants and osteonecrosis. J Rheumatol; Apr 2003.
1518. Jacobs, B. Epidemiology of traumatic and nontraumatic osteonecrosis. Clin Orthop Relat
Res; Jan-Feb 1978.
1519. Chang, C. C., Greenspan, A., Gershwin, M. E. Osteonecrosis: current perspectives on
pathogenesis and treatment. Semin Arthritis Rheum; Aug 1993.
1520. Glesby, M. J. Bone disorders in human immunodeficiency virus infection. Clin Infect Dis;
2003.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

792

1521. Koo, K. H., Kim, R., Ko, G. H., Song, H. R., Jeong, S. T., Cho, S. H. Preventing collapse in
early osteonecrosis of the femoral head. A randomised clinical trial of core decompression. J
Bone Joint Surg Br; Nov 1995.
1522. Wang, C. J., Wang, F. S., Huang, C. C., Yang, K. D., Weng, L. H., Huang, H. Y. Treatment
for osteonecrosis of the femoral head: comparison of extracorporeal shock waves with core
decompression and bone-grafting. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Nov 2005.
1523. Babis GC, Soucacos PN. Effectiveness of total hip arthroplasty in the management of
hip osteonecrosis. Ortho Clinics of No Am; 2004.
1524. Hungerford, DS. Bone marrow pressure, venography and core decompression in
ischemic necrosis of the femoral head. The Hip: Proceedings of the Seventh Open Scientific
Meeting of the Hip Society; 1979.
1525. LaPorte, D. M., Mont, M. A., Mohan, V., Pierre-Jacques, H., Jones, L. C., Hungerford, D.
S. Osteonecrosis of the humeral head treated by core decompression. Clin Orthop Relat Res;
Oct 1998.
1526. Harreld, K. L., Marker, D. R., Wiesler, E. R., Shafiq, B., Mont, M. A. Osteonecrosis of the
humeral head. J Am Acad Orthop Surg; Jun 2009.
1527. Zizic, TM, Marcoux, C, Hungerford, DS, Stevens, MB. The early diagnosis of ischemic
necrosis of bone. Arthritis &amp; Rheumatism: Official Journal of the American College of
Rheumatology; 1986.
1528. L'lnsalata, John C, Pagnani, Michael J, Warren, Russell F, Dines, David M. Humeral head
osteonecrosis: clinical course and radiographic predictors of outcome. Journal of shoulder and
elbow surgery; 1996.
1529. Shinoda, S, Hasegawa, Y, Kawasaki, S, Tagawa, N, Iwata, H. Magnetic resonance imaging
of osteonecrosis in divers: comparison with plain radiographs. Skeletal radiology; 1997.
1530. Blanchard, T. K., Bearcroft, P. W., Constant, C. R., Griffin, D. R., Dixon, A. K. Diagnostic
and therapeutic impact of MRI and arthrography in the investigation of full-thickness rotator
cuff tears. Eur Radiol; 1999.
1531. Kim, S. H., Kim, H. K., Sun, J. I., Park, J. S., Oh, I. Arthroscopic capsulolabroplasty for
posteroinferior multidirectional instability of the shoulder. Am J Sports Med; Apr-May 2004.
1532. Marker, D. R., Seyler, T. M., Ulrich, S. D., Srivastava, S., Mont, M. A. Do modern
techniques improve core decompression outcomes for hip osteonecrosis?. Clin Orthop Relat
Res; May 2008.
1533. Mont, M. A., Ragland, P. S., Etienne, G. Core decompression of the femoral head for
osteonecrosis using percutaneous multiple small-diameter drilling. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Dec
2004.
1534. Mont, M. A., Maar, D. C., Urquhart, M. W., Lennox, D., Hungerford, D. S. Avascular
necrosis of the humeral head treated by core decompression. A retrospective review. J Bone
Joint Surg Br; Sep 1993.
1535. Hardy, P., Decrette, E., Jeanrot, C., Colom, A., Lortat-Jacob, A., Benoit, J. Arthroscopic
treatment of bilateral humeral head osteonecrosis. Arthroscopy; Apr 2000.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

793

1536. Shannon, B. D., Trousdale, R. T. Femoral osteotomies for avascular necrosis of the
femoral head. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Jan 2004.
1537. Castro, F. P.,Jr., Barrack, R. L. Core decompression and conservative treatment for
avascular necrosis of the femoral head: a meta-analysis. Am J Orthop; Mar 2000.
1538. Learmonth, I. D., Maloon, S., Dall, G. Core decompression for early atraumatic
osteonecrosis of the femoral head. J Bone Joint Surg Br; May 1990.
1539. Scully, S. P., Aaron, R. K., Urbaniak, J. R. Survival analysis of hips treated with core
decompression or vascularized fibular grafting because of avascular necrosis. J Bone Joint Surg
Am; Sep 1998.
1540. Chapman, C., Mattern, C., Levine, W. N. Arthroscopically assisted core decompression
of the proximal humerus for avascular necrosis. Arthroscopy; Nov 2004.
1541. Dines, J. S., Strauss, E. J., Fealy, S., Craig, E. V. Arthroscopic-assisted core decompression
of the humeral head. Arthroscopy; Jan 2007.
1542. Aldridge, J. M.,3rd, Urbaniak, J. R. Avascular necrosis of the femoral head: role of
vascularized bone grafts. Orthop Clin North Am; Jan 2007.
1543. Rindell, K. Muscle pedicled bone graft in revascularization of aseptic necrosis of the
humeral head. Ann Chir Gynaecol; 1987.
1544. Yajima, H., Tamai, S., Ono, H., Kizaki, K. Vascularized bone grafts to the upper
extremities. Plast Reconstr Surg; Mar 1998.
1545. Seyler, T. M., Marker, D. R., Ulrich, S. D., Fatscher, T., Mont, M. A. Nonvascularized bone
grafting defers joint arthroplasty in hip osteonecrosis. Clin Orthop Relat Res; May 2008.
1546. Parsch, D., Lehner, B., Loew, M. Shoulder arthroplasty in nontraumatic osteonecrosis
of the humeral head. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; May-Jun 2003.
1547. Mansat, P., Huser, L., Mansat, M., Bellumore, Y., Rongieres, M., Bonnevialle, P. Shoulder
arthroplasty for atraumatic avascular necrosis of the humeral head: nineteen shoulders
followed up for a mean of seven years. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Mar-Apr 2005.
1548. Orfaly, R. M., Rockwood, C. A.,Jr., Esenyel, C. Z., Wirth, M. A. Shoulder arthroplasty in
cases with avascular necrosis of the humeral head. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; May-Jun 2007.
1549. Cruess, R. L. Experience with steroid-induced avascular necrosis of the shoulder and
etiologic considerations regarding osteonecrosis of the hip. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Jan-Feb
1978.
1550. Lau, M. W., Blinder, M. A., Williams, K., Galatz, L. M. Shoulder arthroplasty in sickle cell
patients with humeral head avascular necrosis. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Mar-Apr 2007.
1551. Barnes, C. L., Collins, D. N., Nelson, C. L. Cup arthroplasty, surface replacement
arthroplasty, and femoral head resurfacing for osteonecrosis. Semin Arthroplasty; Jul 1991.
1552. Adili, A., Trousdale, R. T. Femoral head resurfacing for the treatment of osteonecrosis
in the young patient. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Dec 2003.
1553. Aaron, RK,Steinberg,ME. Electrical stimulation of osteonecrosis of the femoral head.
Semin Arthroplasty; 1991.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

794

1554. Marchant Jr, Milford H, Stubbs, Allston J, Basamania, Carl J. Technique and early results
of intramedullary pressure-guided core decompression of the humeral head for nontraumatic
osteonecrosis. Techniques in Shoulder &amp; Elbow Surgery; 2008.
1555. Guerin, Gilles, Habibi, Anoosha, Hernigou, Philippe, Zilber, Sebastien. Core
decompression with autologous bone marrow aspirate injection in humeral head
osteonecrosis in adults with sickle cell disease. International Orthopaedics; 2021.
1556. Hernigou, Philippe, Hernigou, Jacques, Scarlat, Marius. Mesenchymal stem cell therapy
improved outcome of early post-traumatic shoulder osteonecrosis: a prospective randomized
clinical study of fifty patients with over ten year follow-up. International Orthopaedics; 2021.
1557. Steinberg, M. E., Larcom, P. G., Strafford, B., Hosick, W. B., Corces, A., Bands, R. E.,
Hartman, K. E. Core decompression with bone grafting for osteonecrosis of the femoral head.
Clin Orthop Relat Res; May 2001.
1558. Warner, J. J., Philip, J. H., Brodsky, G. L., Thornhill, T. S. Studies of nontraumatic
osteonecrosis. The role of core decompression in the treatment of nontraumatic
osteonecrosis of the femoral head. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Dec 1987.
1559. Rijnen, W. H., Gardeniers, J. W., Buma, P., Yamano, K., Slooff, T. J., Schreurs, B. W.
Treatment of femoral head osteonecrosis using bone impaction grafting. Clin Orthop Relat
Res; Dec 2003.
1560. Stulberg, B. N., Davis, A. W., Bauer, T. W., Levine, M., Easley, K. Osteonecrosis of the
femoral head. A prospective randomized treatment protocol. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Jul 1991.
1561. Allen, Donald A., Merrill, Christian, Cote, Mark P., Mazzocca, Augustus D. Inlay
hemiarthroplasty of the humeral head for nontraumatic osteonecrosis. Seminars in
arthroplasty. ; 2020.
1562. Feeley, B., Fealy, S., Dines, D., Warren, R., Craig, E. Hemiarthroplasty and total shoulder
arthroplasty for avascular necrosis of the humeral head. JSES; 2008.
1563. Franceschi, Francesco, Franceschetti, Edoardo, Paciotti, Michele, Torre, Guglielmo,
Samuelsson, Kristian, Papalia, Rocco, Karlsson, Jón, Denaro, Vincenzo. Surgical management
of osteonecrosis of the humeral head: a systematic review. Knee surgery, sports
traumatology, arthroscopy : official journal of the ESSKA. ; 2017.
1564. Gadea, F., Alami, G., Pape, G., Boileau, P., Favard, L. Shoulder hemiarthroplasty:
outcomes and long-term survival analysis according to etiology. Orthopaedics &amp;
traumatology, surgery &amp; research. ; 2012.
1565. Le Coz, P., Herve, A., Thomazeau, H. Surgical treatments of atraumatic avascular
necrosis of the shoulder. Morphologie : bulletin de l&#x27;Association des anatomistes. ;
2021.
1566. Raiss, Patric, Kasten, Philip, Baumann, Florian, Moser, Michael, Rickert, Markus, Loew,
Markus. Treatment of osteonecrosis of the humeral head with cementless surface
replacement arthroplasty. Journal of bone and joint surgery. ; 2009.
1567. Ristow, Jacob J., Ellison, Ciani M., Mickschl, Dara J., Berg, Kenneth C., Haidet, Kirk C.,
Gray, Jason R., Grindel, Steven I. Outcomes of shoulder replacement in humeral head
avascular necrosis. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery : JSES. ; 2019.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

795

1568. Schoch, Bradley S., Barlow, Jonathan D., Schleck, Cathy, Cofield, Robert H., Sperling,
John W. Shoulder arthroplasty for atraumatic osteonecrosis of the humeral head. Journal of
shoulder and elbow surgery : JSES. ; 2016.
1569. Sowa, Boris, Thierjung, Heidi, Bülhoff, Matthias, Loew, Markus, Zeifang, Felix, Bruckner,
Thomas, Raiss, Patric. Functional results of hemi- and total shoulder arthroplasty according
to diagnosis and patient age at surgery. Acta orthopaedica. ; 2017.
1570. Sweet, Stephan J., Takara, Tad, Ho, Lance, Tibone, James E. Primary partial humeral
head resurfacing: outcomes with the HemiCAP implant. The American journal of sports
medicine. ; 2015.
1571. Uribe, J., Botto-van Bemden, A. Partial humeral head resurfacing for osteonecrosis.
JSES; 2009.
1572. Dacre, J. E., Beeney, N., Scott, D. L. Injections and physiotherapy for the painful stiff
shoulder. Ann Rheum Dis; Apr 1989.
1573. Duplay. Rotator cuff disease. Arch Gén Méd; 1872.
1574. Neviaser, JS. Adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder. A study of the pathological findings in
periarthritis of the shoulder. J. Bone and Joint Surg; 1945.
1575. Itoi, E. Pathophysiology and treatment of atraumatic instability of the shoulder. J
Orthop Sci; 2004.
1576. Lundberg, J. The frozen shoulder. Clinical and radiographical observations. The effect
of manipulation under general anesthesia. Structure and glycosaminoglycan content of the
joint capsule. Local bone metabolism. Acta Orthop Scand; 1969.
1577. Wiley, A. M. Arthroscopic appearance of frozen shoulder. Arthroscopy; 1991.
1578. Bunker, TD,Anthony,PP. The pathology of frozen shoulder. A Dupuytren-like disease. J
Bone Joint Surg Br; 1995.
1579. Carette, S. Adhesive capsulitis--research advances frozen in time?. J Rheumatol; Jun
2000.
1580. Rizk, T. E., Pinals, R. S. Frozen shoulder. Semin Arthritis Rheum; May 1982.
1581. Ogilvie-Harris, D. J., Biggs, D. J., Fitsialos, D. P., MacKay, M. The resistant frozen
shoulder. Manipulation versus arthroscopic release. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Oct 1995.
1582. Binder, A. I., Bulgen, D. Y., Hazleman, B. L., Roberts, S. Frozen shoulder: a long-term
prospective study. Ann Rheum Dis; Jun 1984.
1583. Griggs, S. M., Ahn, A., Green, A. Idiopathic adhesive capsulitis. A prospective functional
outcome study of nonoperative treatment. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Oct 2000.
1584. Grubbs, N. Frozen shoulder syndrome: a review of literature. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther;
Sep 1993.
1585. Andersen, N. H., Johannsen, H. V., Sneppen, O., Sojbjerg, J. O. Frozen shoulder.
Arthroscopy and manipulation in general anesthesia, followed by early passive mobilization.
Ugeskr Laeger; Jan 8 1996.
1586. Loew, M., Heichel, T. O., Lehner, B. Intraarticular lesions in primary frozen shoulder
after manipulation under general anesthesia. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jan-Feb 2005.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

796

1587. Quraishi, N. A., Johnston, P., Bayer, J., Crowe, M., Chakrabarti, A. J. Thawing the frozen
shoulder. A randomised trial comparing manipulation under anaesthesia with
hydrodilatation. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Sep 2007.
1588. Grey, R. G. The natural history of &quot;idiopathic&quot; frozen shoulder. J Bone Joint
Surg Am; Jun 1978.
1589. Reeves, B. The natural history of the frozen shoulder syndrome. Scand J Rheumatol;
1975.
1590. Hannafin, J. A., Chiaia, T. A. Adhesive capsulitis. A treatment approach. Clin Orthop Relat
Res; Mar 2000.
1591. Miller, M. D., Wirth, M. A., Rockwood, C. A.,Jr. Thawing the frozen shoulder: the
&quot;patient&quot; patient. Orthopedics; Oct 1996.
1592. Rowe, C. R. Recurrent anterior transient subluxation of the shoulder. The &quot;dead
arm&quot; syndrome. Orthop Clin North Am; Oct 1988.
1593. Siegel, L. B., Cohen, N. J., Gall, E. P. Adhesive capsulitis: a sticky issue. Am Fam Physician;
Apr 1 1999.
1594. Diercks, R. L., Stevens, M. Gentle thawing of the frozen shoulder: a prospective study
of supervised neglect versus intensive physical therapy in seventy-seven patients with frozen
shoulder syndrome followed up for two years. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Sep-Oct 2004.
1595. Shaffer, B., Tibone, J. E., Kerlan, R. K. Frozen shoulder. A long-term follow-up. J Bone
Joint Surg Am; Jun 1992.
1596. Noel, E., Thomas, T., Schaeverbeke, T., Thomas, P., Bonjean, M., Revel, M. Frozen
shoulder. Joint Bone Spine; 2000.
1597. Murnaghan, JP. Frozen shoulder. The Shoulder; 1990.
1598. Vecchio, P., Kavanagh, R., Hazleman, B. L., King, R. H. Shoulder pain in a communitybased rheumatology clinic. Br J Rheumatol; May 1995.
1599. Simmonds, F. A. Shoulder pain with particular reference to the frozen shoulder. J Bone
Joint Surg Br; Aug 1949.
1600. Waldburger, M., Meier, J. L., Gobelet, C. The frozen shoulder: diagnosis and treatment.
Prospective study of 50 cases of adhesive capsulitis. Clin Rheumatol; Sep 1992.
1601. Murnaghan, J. P. Adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder: current concepts and treatment.
Orthopedics; Jan 1988.
1602. Hazleman, BL. The painful stiff shoulder. Rheumatol Phys Med; 1972.
1603. Fleming, A., Dodman, S., Beer, T. C., Crown, S. Personality in frozen shoulder. Ann
Rheum Dis; Oct 1975.
1604. Andersen, N. H., Sojbjerg, J. O., Johannsen, H. V., Sneppen, O. Frozen shoulder:
arthroscopy and manipulation under general anesthesia and early passive motion. J Shoulder
Elbow Surg; May-Jun 1998.
1605. Mulcahy, K. A., Baxter, A. D., Oni, O. O., Finlay, D. The value of shoulder distension
arthrography with intraarticular injection of steroid and local anaesthetic: a follow-up study.
Br J Radiol; Mar 1994.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

797

1606. Hamer, J., Kirk, J. A. Physiotherapy and the frozen shoulder: a comparative trial of ice
and ultrasonic therapy. N Z Med J; Mar 24 1976.
1607. Bulgen, D. Y., Binder, A. I., Hazleman, B. L., Dutton, J., Roberts, S. Frozen shoulder:
prospective clinical study with an evaluation of three treatment regimens. Ann Rheum Dis;
Jun 1984.
1608. Massoud, S. N., Pearse, E. O., Levy, O., Copeland, S. A. Operative management of the
frozen shoulder in patients with diabetes. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Nov-Dec 2002.
1609. Hamdan, T. A., Al-Essa, K. A. Manipulation under anaesthesia for the treatment of
frozen shoulder. Int Orthop; 2003.
1610. Kivimaki, J., Pohjolainen, T., Malmivaara, A., Kannisto, M., Guillaume, J., Seitsalo, S.,
Nissinen, M. Manipulation under anesthesia with home exercises versus home exercises
alone in the treatment of frozen shoulder: a randomized, controlled trial with 125 patients. J
Shoulder Elbow Surg; Nov-Dec 2007.
1611. Bridgman, J. F. Periarthritis of the shoulder and diabetes mellitus. Ann Rheum Dis; Jan
1972.
1612. Pal, B., Anderson, J., Dick, W. C., Griffiths, I. D. Limitation of joint mobility and shoulder
capsulitis in insulin- and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Br J Rheumatol; May 1986.
1613. Ogilvie-Harris, D. J., Myerthall, S. The diabetic frozen shoulder: arthroscopic release.
Arthroscopy; Feb 1997.
1614. Wohlgethan, J. R. Frozen shoulder in hyperthyroidism. Arthritis Rheum; Aug 1987.
1615. Fisher, L., Kurtz, A., Shipley, M. Association between cheiroarthropathy and frozen
shoulder in patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Br J Rheumatol; May 1986.
1616. Coventry, M. B. Problem of painful shoulder. J Am Med Assoc; Jan 17 1953.
1617. Chan, Justin H, Ho, Bryant S, Alvi, Hasham M, Saltzman, Matthew D, Marra, Guido. The
relationship between the incidence of adhesive capsulitis and hemoglobin A1c. Journal of
shoulder and elbow surgery; 2017.
1618. Bulgen, D. Y., Hazleman, B. L., Voak, D. HLA-B27 and frozen shoulder. Lancet; May 15
1976.
1619. Ross, D. G. Diagnostic overview: frozen shoulder. Orthop Nurs; Mar-Apr 1983.
1620. Hakuno, A., Sashika, H., Ohkawa, T., Itoh, R. Arthrographic findings in hemiplegic
shoulders. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Nov 1984.
1621. Bowman, C. A., Jeffcoate, W. J., Pattrick, M., Doherty, M. Bilateral adhesive capsulitis,
oligoarthritis and proximal myopathy as presentation of hypothyroidism. Br J Rheumatol; Feb
1988.
1622. Bulgen, D., Hazleman, B., Ward, M., McCallum, M. Immunological studies in frozen
shoulder. Ann Rheum Dis; Apr 1978.
1623. Esch, JC. Arthroscopic treatment of resistant primary (idiopathic) frozen shoulder. J
Shoulder Elbow Surg; 1994.
1624. Janda, DH, Hawkins, RJ. Shoulder manipulation in patients with adhesive capsulitis and
diabetes mellitus: a clinical note. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; 1993.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

798

1625. Pollock, R. G., Duralde, X. A., Flatow, E. L., Bigliani, L. U. The use of arthroscopy in the
treatment of resistant frozen shoulder. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Jul 1994.
1626. Lorenz, T. H., Musser, M. J. Life stress, emotions and painful stiff shoulder. Ann Intern
Med; Dec 1952.
1627. Oesterreicher, W., Van, D. A. M. Social psychological researches into brachialgia and
periarthritis. Arthritis Rheum; Dec 1964.
1628. Baslund, B., Thomsen, B. S., Jensen, E. M. Frozen shoulder: current concepts. Scand J
Rheumatol; 1990.
1629. van der Heijden, G. J. Shoulder disorders: a state-of-the-art review. Baillieres Best Pract
Res Clin Rheumatol; Jun 1999.
1630. Redler, Lauren H, Dennis, Elizabeth R. Treatment of adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder.
JAAOS-Journal of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons; 2019.
1631. Lee, Michael, Theodoulou, Annika, Krishnan, Jeganath. Criteria used for diagnosis of
adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder: a scoping review protocol. JBI Evidence Synthesis; 2018.
1632. Zuckerman, Joseph D, Rokito, Andrew. Frozen shoulder: a consensus definition. Journal
of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery; 2011.
1633. Cerny, Milena, Omoumi, Patrick, Larbi, Ahmed, Manicourt, Daniel, Perozziello, Anne,
Lecouvet, Frédéric, Berg, Bruno Vande, Dallaudiere, Benjamin. CT arthrography of adhesive
capsulitis of the shoulder: Are MR signs applicable?. European journal of radiology open;
2017.
1634. Polat, Gökhan, Ogul, Hayri, Yalçin, Ahmet, Tuncer, Kutsi, Kaya, Serhat, Pirimoglu,
Berhan, Sade, Recep, Kantarci, Mecit. Efficacy of the Rotational Traction Method in the
Assessment of Glenohumeral Cartilage Surface Area in Computed Tomography Arthrography.
Journal of computer assisted tomography; 2019.
1635. Tran, Gui, Cowling, Paul, Smith, Toby, Bury, Julie, Lucas, Adam, Barr, Andrew, Kingsbury,
Sarah R, Conaghan, Philip G. What Imaging‐Detected Pathologies Are Associated With
Shoulder Symptoms and Their Persistence? A Systematic Literature Review. Arthritis care
&amp; research; 2018.
1636. Lee, Jung-Sang, Do, Jong Geol, Yoon, Kyung Jae, Chae, Seoung Wan, Park, Hee-Jin, Park,
Chul-Hyun, Lee, Yong-Taek. Voxel-based three-dimensional Segmentation of the capsulosynovium from contrast-enhanced MRi can Represent clinical impairments in Adhesive
capsulitis. Scientific reports; 2020.
1637. Ahn K-S, Kang CH,Kim Y,Jeong W-K. Diagnosis of adhesive capsulitis: comparison of
contrast-enhanced MRI with noncontrast-enhanced MRI. Clinical imaging; 2015.
1638. Ahn, Kyung-Sik, Kang, Chang Ho, Oh, Yu-Whan, Jeong, Woong-Kyo. Correlation between
magnetic resonance imaging and clinical impairment in patients with adhesive capsulitis.
Skeletal radiology; 2012.
1639. Carbone, Stefano, Napoli, Alessandro, Gumina, Stefano. MRI of adhesive capsulitis of
the shoulder: distension of the bursa in the superior subscapularis recess is a suggestive sign
of the pathology. European journal of radiology; 2014.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

799

1640. Chellathurai, Amarnath, Subbiah, Komalavalli, Elangovan, Atchaya, Kannappan,
Sivakumar. Adhesive capsulitis: MRI correlation with clinical stages and proposal of MRI
staging. The Indian journal of radiology &amp; imaging; 2019.
1641. Chi, Andrew S, Kim, John, Long, Suzanne S, Morrison, William B, Zoga, Adam C. Noncontrast MRI diagnosis of adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder. Clinical imaging; 2017.
1642. Choi Y-H, Kim DH. Correlations between clinical features and MRI findings in early
adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder: a retrospective observational study. BMC Musculoskeletal
Disorders; 2020.
1643. Connell, David, Padmanabhan, Ravi, Buchbinder, Rachelle. Adhesive capsulitis: role of
MR imaging in differential diagnosis. European radiology; 2002.
1644. Gokalp, Gokhan, Algin, Oktay, Yildirim, Nalan, Yazici, Zeynep. Adhesive capsulitis:
Contrast‐enhanced shoulder MRI findings. Journal of medical imaging and radiation oncology;
2011.
1645. Jung, Jae Hoon, Kim, Du Hwan, Yi, Jaehyuck, Kim, Du-Han, Cho, Chul-Hyun.
Determination of magnetic resonance imaging criteria for diagnosis of adhesive capsulitis.
Rheumatology international; 2019.
1646. Kanazawa, Kenji, Hagiwara, Yoshihiro, Sekiguchi, Takuya, Suzuki, Kazuaki, Koide,
Masashi, Ando, Akira, Yabe, Yutaka. Correlations between Capsular Changes and ROM
Restriction in Frozen Shoulder Evaluated by Plain MRI and MR Arthrography. The open
orthopaedics journal; 2018.
1647. Lee, S. Y., Park, J., Song, S. W. Correlation of MR arthrographic findings and range of
shoulder motions in patients with frozen shoulder. AJR Am J Roentgenol; Jan 2012.
1648. Lefevre-Colau, Marie-Martine, Drapé, Jean-Luc, Fayad, Fouad, Rannou, Francois, Diche,
Thierry, Minvielle, Francois, Demaille-Wlodyka, Samantha, Mayoux-Benhamou, Marie-Anne,
Fermanian, Jacques, Poiraudeau, Serge. Magnetic resonance imaging of shoulders with
idiopathic adhesive capsulitis: reliability of measures. European radiology; 2005.
1649. Li, Jin-qing, Tang, Kang-lai, Wang, Jian, Li, Qi-yu, Xu, Hao-tong, Yang, Hui-feng, Tan, Liwen, Liu, Kai-jun, Zhang, Shao-xiang. MRI findings for frozen shoulder evaluation: is the
thickness of the coracohumeral ligament a valuable diagnostic tool?. PLoS One; 2011.
1650. Park, Gi-Young, Park, Jung Hyun, Kwon, Dong Rak, Kwon, Dae Gil, Park, Jinyoung. Do
the findings of magnetic resonance imaging, arthrography, and ultrasonography reflect
clinical impairment in patients with idiopathic adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder?. Archives
of physical medicine and rehabilitation; 2017.
1651. Park, Jina, Choi, Yoon-Hee, Chai, Jee Won, Cha, Seung Woo, Lim, Joo Hee, Jo, Chris
Hyunchul, Kim, Dong Hyun. Anterior capsular abnormality: another important MRI finding for
the diagnosis of adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder. Skeletal radiology; 2019.
1652. Sasanuma, Hideyuki, Sugimoto, Hideharu, Fujita, Akifumi, Kanaya, Yuji, Iijima, Yuki,
Saito, Toshihiro, Takeshita, Katsushi. Characteristics of dynamic magnetic resonance imaging
of idiopathic severe frozen shoulder. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery; 2017.
1653. Sasanuma, Hideyuki, Sugimoto, Hideharu, Iijima, Yuki, Kanaya, Yuji, Saito, Tomohiro,
Takeshita, Katsushi. Blood flow evaluation by dynamic magnetic resonance imaging of

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

800

symptomatic rotator cuff tears and frozen shoulders. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery;
2018.
1654. Sernik, Renato A, Vidal Leão, Renata, Luis Bizetto, Eduardo, Sanford Damasceno,
Rodrigo, Horvat, Natally, Guido Cerri, Giovanni. Thickening of the axillary recess capsule on
ultrasound correlates with magnetic resonance imaging signs of adhesive capsulitis.
Ultrasound; 2019.
1655. Sofka, Carolyn M, Ciavarra, Gina A, Hannafin, Jo A, Cordasco, Frank A, Potter, Hollis G.
Magnetic resonance imaging of adhesive capsulitis: correlation with clinical staging. HSS
Journal®; 2008.
1656. Suh, Chong Hyun, Yun, Seong Jong, Jin, Wook, Lee, Sun Hwa, Park, So Young, Park, Ji
Seon, Ryu, Kyung Nam. Systematic review and meta-analysis of magnetic resonance imaging
features for diagnosis of adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder. European radiology; 2019.
1657. Teixeira, Pedro A Gondim, Balaj, Clémence, Chanson, Anne, Lecocq, Sophie, Louis,
Matthias, Blum, Alain. Adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder: value of inferior glenohumeral
ligament signal changes on T2-weighted fat-saturated images. American Journal of
Roentgenology; 2012.
1658. Zhao, Wen, Zheng, Xiaofeng, Liu, Yuying, Yang, Wenlu, Amirbekian, Vardan, Diaz, Luis
E, Huang, Xudong. An MRI study of symptomatic adhesive capsulitis. PLoS One; 2012.
1659. Pessis, E., Mihoubi, F., Feydy, A., Campagna, R., Guerini, H., Roren, A., Rannou, F., Drape,
J. L., Lefevre-Colau, M. M. Usefulness of intravenous contrast-enhanced MRI for diagnosis of
adhesive capsulitis. Eur Radiol; Nov 2020.
1660. Mengiardi, Bernard, Pfirrmann, Christian WA, Gerber, Christian, Hodler, Jurg, Zanetti,
Marco. Frozen shoulder: MR arthrographic findings. Radiology; 2004.
1661. Geoffrey L. Manton, Mark E. Schweitzer,Dominik Weishaupt,David Karasick. Utility of
MR arthrography in the diagnosis of adhesive capsulitis. Skeletal Radiol; 2001.
1662. Ogul H, Tas N,Tuncer K,Polat G,Ogul Y,Pirimoglu B,Kantarci M. 3D volumetric MR
arthrographic assessment of shoulder joint capacity in patients with primary adhesive
capsulitis. Br J Radiol; 2019.
1663. Isabelle Steurer-Dober , MD Kaspar Rufi bach ,PhD Juerg Hodler ,MD ,MBA Nadja Saupe
,MD Marco Zanetti ,MD Sandro F. Fucentese ,MD Christian W. A. Pfi rrmann ,MD ,MBA. Do
Patients with Structural Abnormalities of the Shoulder Experience Pain after MR Arthrography
of the Shoulder?. Radiology; 2010.
1664. Jung, J. Y., Jee, W. H., Chun, H. J., Kim, Y. S., Chung, Y. G., Kim, J. M. Adhesive capsulitis
of the shoulder: evaluation with MR arthrography. Eur Radiol; Apr 2006.
1665. Kim, K. C., Rhee, K. J., Shin, H. D. Adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder: dimensions of the
rotator interval measured with magnetic resonance arthrography. J Shoulder Elbow Surg;
May-Jun 2009.
1666. Lee, K. H., Park, H. J., Lee, S. Y., Youn, I. Y., Kim, E., Park, J. H., Park, S. J. Adhesive
Capsulitis of the Shoulder Joint: Value of Glenohumeral Distance on Magnetic Resonance
Arthrography. J Comput Assist Tomogr; Jan 2017.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

801

1667. Song, K. D., Kwon, J. W., Yoon, Y. C., Choi, S. H. Indirect MR arthrographic findings of
adhesive capsulitis. AJR Am J Roentgenol; Dec 2011.
1668. Mehmet Halit Yilmaz, Fatih Kantarci,Ibrahim Adaletli,Sila Ulus,Fatih Gulsen,Harun
Ozer,Ilknur Aktas,Kenan Akgun,Kaya Kanberoglu. Pain &amp; resistance in patients with
adhesive capsulitis during contrast material injection phase of MR arthrography. Indian J Med
Res; 2007.
1669. Min Hee Lee, MD,Joong Mo Ahn,MD,Claus Muhle,MD,Sung Hyun Kim,MD,Ji Seon
Park,MD,Seung Ho Kim,MD,Sung Moon Kim,MD and Heung Sik Kang,MD. Adhesive Capsulitis
of the Shoulder Diagnosis Using Magnetic Resonance Arthrography, with Arthroscopic
Findings as the Standard. J Comput Assist Tomogr; 2003.
1670. Ogul, H., Kantarci, M., Topal, M., Karaca, L., Tuncer, K., Pirimoglu, B., Okur, A., Yildirim,
O. S., Levent, A. Extra-articular contrast material leaks into locations unrelated to the injection
path in shoulder MR arthrography. Eur Radiol; Oct 2014.
1671. Yoon, J. P., Chung, S. W., Lee, B. J., Kim, H. S., Yi, J. H., Lee, H. J., Jeong, W. J., Moon, S.
G., Oh, K. S., Yoon, S. T. Correlations of magnetic resonance imaging findings with clinical
symptom severity and prognosis of frozen shoulder. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc; Oct
2017.
1672. Porat, S., Leupold, J. A., Burnett, K. R., Nottage, W. M. Reliability of non-imaging-guided
glenohumeral joint injection through rotator interval approach in patients undergoing
diagnostic MR arthrography. AJR Am J Roentgenol; Sep 2008.
1673. Ryan, V., Brown, H., Minns Lowe, C. J., Lewis, J. S. The pathophysiology associated with
primary (idiopathic) frozen shoulder: A systematic review. BMC Musculoskelet Disord; Aug 15
2016.
1674. Tandon, Anupama, Dewan, Sakshi, Bhatt, Shuchi, Jain, A. K., Kumari, Rima. Sonography
in diagnosis of adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder: a case-control study. Journal of ultrasound;
2017.
1675. Duchstein, L. D. L., Jakobsen, J. R., Marker, L., Okholm, M., Friberg, L., Simonsen, L.,
Krogsgaard, M. R. The role of (18)F-FDG PET/CT in the diagnosis of frozen shoulder. Knee Surg
Sports Traumatol Arthrosc; Jan 2021.
1676. Sridharan, R., Engle, M. P., Garg, N., Wei, W., Amini, B. Focal uptake at the rotator
interval or inferior capsule of shoulder on (18)F-FDG PET/CT is associated with adhesive
capsulitis. Skeletal Radiol; Apr 2017.
1677. van Royen, B. J., Pavlov, P. W. Treatment of frozen shoulder by distension and
manipulation under local anaesthesia. Int Orthop; 1996.
1678. Omari, A., Bunker, T. D. Open surgical release for frozen shoulder: surgical findings and
results of the release. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jul-Aug 2001.
1679. Saccomanni, B. Inflammation and shoulder pain--a perspective on rotator cuff disease,
adhesive capsulitis, and osteoarthritis: conservative treatment. Clin Rheumatol; May 2009.
1680. Fareed, D. O., Gallivan, W. R.,Jr. Office management of frozen shoulder syndrome.
Treatment with hydraulic distension under local anesthesia. Clin Orthop Relat Res; May 1989.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

802

1681. Gam, A. N., Schydlowsky, P., Rossel, I., Remvig, L., Jensen, E. M. Treatment of
&quot;frozen shoulder&quot; with distension and glucorticoid compared with glucorticoid
alone. A randomised controlled trial. Scand J Rheumatol; 1998.
1682. Lee, P. N., Lee, M., Haq, A. M., Longton, E. B., Wright, V. Periarthritis of the shoulder.
Trial of treatments investigated by multivariate analysis. Ann Rheum Dis; Mar 1974.
1683. Leung, M. S., Cheing, G. L. Effects of deep and superficial heating in the management
of frozen shoulder. J Rehabil Med; Feb 2008.
1684. Ranalletta, Maximiliano, Rossi, Luciano A, Bongiovanni, Santiago L, Tanoira, Ignacio,
Elizondo, Cristina M, Maignon, Gastón D. Corticosteroid injections accelerate pain relief and
recovery of function compared with oral NSAIDs in patients with adhesive capsulitis: a
randomized controlled trial. The American journal of sports medicine; 2016.
1685. Wang, Wei, Shi, Mingmin, Zhou, Chenhe, Shi, Zhongli, Cai, Xunzi, Lin, Tiao, Yan, Shigui.
Effectiveness of corticosteroid injections in adhesive capsulitis of shoulder: A meta-analysis.
Medicine; 2017.
1686. Patel, B. R. A comparative study of subsyde-CR versus meloxicam in rheumatic
disorders. J Indian Med Assoc; May 2000.
1687. Saeidian, S. R., Hemmati, A. A., Haghighi, M. H. Pain relieving effect of short-course,
pulse prednisolone in managing frozen shoulder. J Pain Palliat Care Pharmacother; 2007.
1688. Buchbinder, R., Green, S., Youd, J. M., Johnston, R. V. Oral steroids for adhesive
capsulitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2006.
1689. Blockey, N. J., Wright, J. K., Kellgren, J. H. Oral cortisone therapy in periarthritis of the
shoulder; a controlled trial. Br Med J; Jun 26 1954.
1690. Widiastuti-Samekto, M., Sianturi, G. P. Frozen shoulder syndrome: comparison of oral
route corticosteroid and intra-articular corticosteroid injection. Med J Malaysia; Aug 2004.
1691. Peet, R. M., Henriksen, J. D., Anderson, T. P., Martin, G. M. Thoracic-outlet syndrome:
evaluation of a therapeutic exercise program. Proc Staff Meet Mayo Clin; May 2 1956.
1692. Huang, J. H., Zager, E. L. Thoracic outlet syndrome. Neurosurgery; Oct 2004.
1693. Wilbourn, A. J. Thoracic outlet syndrome is overdiagnosed. Muscle Nerve; Jan 1999.
1694. Roos, D. B. The thoracic outlet syndrome is underrated. Arch Neurol; Mar 1990.
1695. Fechter, J. D., Kuschner, S. H. The thoracic outlet syndrome. Orthopedics; Nov 1993.
1696. Franklin, G. M., Fulton-Kehoe, D., Bradley, C., Smith-Weller, T. Outcome of surgery for
thoracic outlet syndrome in Washington state workers&#x27; compensation. Neurology; Mar
28 2000.
1697. Povlsen, S., Povlsen, B. Diagnosing Thoracic Outlet Syndrome: Current Approaches and
Future Directions. Diagnostics (Basel); Mar 20 2018.
1698. George, E. L., Arya, S., Rothenberg, K. A., Hernandez-Boussard, T., Ho, V. T., Stern, J. R.,
Gelabert, H. A., Lee, J. T. Contemporary Practices and Complications of Surgery for Thoracic
Outlet Syndrome in the United States. Ann Vasc Surg; Apr 2021.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

803

1699. Ferrante, M. A., Ferrante, N. D. The thoracic outlet syndromes: Part 1. Overview of the
thoracic outlet syndromes and review of true neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome. Muscle
Nerve; Jun 2017.
1700. Ferrante, M. A., Ferrante, N. D. The thoracic outlet syndromes: Part 2. The arterial,
venous, neurovascular, and disputed thoracic outlet syndromes. Muscle Nerve; Oct 2017.
1701. Campbell, J. N., Naff, N. J., Dellon, A. L. Thoracic outlet syndrome. Neurosurgical
perspective. Neurosurg Clin N Am; Jan 1991.
1702. Singh, V. K., Singh, P. K., Balakrishnan, S. K. Bilateral coracoclavicular joints as a rare
cause of bilateral thoracic outlet syndrome and shoulder pain treated successfully by
conservative means. Singapore Med J; Jun 2009.
1703. Iwuagwu, O. C., Bajalan, A. A., Platt, A. J., Stanley, P. R., Drew, P. J. Effects of reduction
mammoplasty on upper-limb nerve conduction across the thoracic outlet in women with
macromastia: a prospective randomized study. Ann Plast Surg; Nov 2005.
1704. Alexandre, A., Coro, L., Azuelos, A., Pellone, M. Thoracic outlet syndrome due to
hyperextension-hyperflexion cervical injury. Acta Neurochir Suppl; 2005.
1705. Crotti, F. M., Carai, A., Carai, M., Grimoldi, N., Sgaramella, E., Sias, W., Tiberio, F. TOS
pathophysiology and clinical features. Acta Neurochir Suppl; 2005.
1706. Yoo, M. J., Seo, J. B., Kim, J. P., Lee, J. H. Surgical treatment of thoracic outlet syndrome
secondary to clavicular malunion. Clin Orthop Surg; Mar 2009.
1707. Pang, D., Wessel, H. B. Thoracic outlet syndrome. Neurosurgery; Jan 1988.
1708. Hussain, M. A., Aljabri, B., Al-Omran, M. Vascular Thoracic Outlet Syndrome. Semin
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg; Spring 2016.
1709. Juvonen, T., Satta, J., Laitala, P., Luukkonen, K., Nissinen, J. Anomalies at the thoracic
outlet are frequent in the general population. Am J Surg; Jul 1995.
1710. Kaplan, J., Kanwal, A. Thoracic Outlet Syndrome. StatPearls; 2021.
1711. Roos, D. B. Edgar J. Poth Lecture. Thoracic outlet syndromes: update 1987. Am J Surg;
Dec 1987.
1712. Roos, D. B. Experience with first rib resection for thoracic outlet syndrome. Ann Surg;
Mar 1971.
1713. Rob, C. G., Standeven, A. Arterial occlusion complicating thoracic outlet compression
syndrome. Br Med J; Sep 20 1958.
1714. Sanders, R. J., Haug, C. Subclavian vein obstruction and thoracic outlet syndrome: a
review of etiology and management. Ann Vasc Surg; Jul 1990.
1715. Huges, ES. Venous obstruction in upper extremity. Brit J Surg; 1948.
1716. Moore, R., Wei Lum, Y. Venous thoracic outlet syndrome. Vasc Med; Apr 2015.
1717. Schubart, PJ, Haeberlin, JR, Porter, JM. Intermittent subclavian venous obstruction:
utility of venous pressure gradients. Surgery; 1986.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

804

1718. Perler, B. A., Mitchell, S. E. Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty and transaxillary first
rib resection. A multidisciplinary approach to the thoracic outlet syndrome. Am Surg; Sep
1986.
1719. Wilbourn, A. J. Thoracic outlet syndrome surgery causing severe brachial plexopathy.
Muscle Nerve; Jan 1988.
1720. Atasoy, E. A hand surgeon&#x27;s advanced experience with thoracic outlet
compression syndrome. Handchir Mikrochir Plast Chir; Jun 2013.
1721. Kaymak, B., Ozcakar, L., Oguz, A. K., Arsava, M., Ozdol, C. A novel finding in thoracic
outlet syndrome: tachycardia. Joint Bone Spine; Sep 2004.
1722. Ozcakar, L., Inanici, F., Kaymak, B., Abali, G., Cetin, A., Hascelik, Z. Quantification of the
weakness and fatigue in thoracic outlet syndrome with isokinetic measurements. Br J Sports
Med; Mar 2005.
1723. DiLosa, K. L., Humphries, M. D. Epidemiology of thoracic outlet syndrome. Semin Vasc
Surg; Mar 2021.
1724. Parziale, J. R., Akelman, E., Weiss, A. P., Green, A. Thoracic outlet syndrome. Am J
Orthop (Belle Mead NJ); May 2000.
1725. Vanti, C., Natalini, L., Romeo, A., Tosarelli, D., Pillastrini, P. Conservative treatment of
thoracic outlet syndrome. A review of the literature. Eura Medicophys; Mar 2007.
1726. Povlsen, B., Belzberg, A., Hansson, T., Dorsi, M. Treatment for thoracic outlet syndrome.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2010.
1727. Mackinnon, S. E., Novak, C. B. Evaluation of the patient with thoracic outlet syndrome.
Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg; Apr 1996.
1728. Muscolino, J. E. Upper extremity paraesthesia: clinical assessment and reasoning. J
Bodyw Mov Ther; Jul 2008.
1729. Illig, K. A., Rodriguez-Zoppi, E. How Common Is Thoracic Outlet Syndrome?. Thorac Surg
Clin; Feb 2021.
1730. Illig, KA,Donahue,D,Duncan,A,et al. Reporting standards of the Society for Vascular
Surgery for thoracic outlet syndrome. Journal of vascular surgery. Journal of Vascular Surgery;
2016.
1731. Thompson, RW. Development of consensus-based diagnostic criteria for NTOS.
Thoracic Outlet Syndrome; 2013.
1732. Demirbag, D., Unlu, E., Ozdemir, F., Genchellac, H., Temizoz, O., Ozdemir, H., Demir, M.
K. The relationship between magnetic resonance imaging findings and postural maneuver and
physical examination tests in patients with thoracic outlet syndrome: results of a doubleblind, controlled study. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Jul 2007.
1733. Cho, Young Jae, Lee, Hyuk Jin, Gong, Hyun Sik, Rhee, Seung Hwan, Park, Sang Jae, Baek,
Goo Hyun. The radiologic relationship of the shoulder girdle to the thorax as an aid in
diagnosing neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome. The Journal of hand surgery; 2012.
1734. Bilbey, JH, Müller, NL, Connell, DG, Luoma, AA, Nelems, B. Thoracic outlet syndrome:
evaluation with CT. Radiology; 1989.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

805

1735. Remy-Jardin, Martine, Remy, Jacques, Masson, Pascal, Bonnel, François, Debatselier,
Philippe, Vinckier, Ludmilla, Duhamel, Alain. Helical CT angiography of thoracic outlet
syndrome: functional anatomy. American Journal of Roentgenology; 2000.
1736. Gillard, Jérôme, Pérez-Cousin, Maryse, Hachulla, Éric, Remy, Jacques, Hurtevent, JeanFrançois, Vinckier, Ludmila, Thévenon, André, Duquesnoy, Bernard. Diagnosing thoracic
outlet syndrome: contribution of provocative tests, ultrasonography, electrophysiology, and
helical computed tomography in 48 patients. Joint Bone Spine; 2001.
1737. Hasanadka, Ravishankar, Towne, Jonathan B, Seabrook, Gary R, Brown, Kellie R, Lewis,
Brian D, Foley, W Dennis. Computed tomography angiography to evaluate thoracic outlet
neurovascular compression. Vascular and endovascular surgery; 2007.
1738. Greenberg, Joshua I, Alix, Kristen, Nehler, Mark R, Johnston, Robert J, Brantigan, Charles
O. Computed tomography-guided reoperation for neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome.
Journal of vascular surgery; 2015.
1739. Center, Gonda Vascular, Jordan, Sheldon E. Combining ultrasonography and
electromyography for botulinum chemodenervation treatment of thoracic outlet syndrome:
comparison with fluoroscopy and electromyography guidance. Pain Physician; 2007.
1740. Passero, S, Paradiso, C, Giannini, F, Cioni, R, Burgalassi, L, Battistini, N. Diagnosis of
thoracic outlet syndrome Relative value of electrophysiological studies. Acta neurologica
scandinavica; 1994.
1741. Panegyres, Peter K, Moore, Niall, Gibson, Rod, Rushworth, Geoffrey, Donaghy, Michael.
Thoracic outlet syndromes and magnetic resonance imaging. Brain; 1993.
1742. Demondion, X, Boutry, N, Drizenko, A, Paul, C, Francke, JP, Cotten, A. Thoracic outlet:
anatomic correlation with MR imaging. American Journal of Roentgenology; 2000.
1743. Demondion, Xavier, Bacqueville, Eric, Paul, Christelle, Duquesnoy, Bernard, Hachulla,
Eric, Cotten, Anne. Thoracic outlet: assessment with MR imaging in asymptomatic and
symptomatic populations. Radiology; 2003.
1744. Smedby, Örjan, Rostad, H, Klaastad, Ø, Lilleås, F, Tillung, T, Fosse, E. Functional imaging
of the thoracic outlet syndrome in an open MR scanner. European radiology; 2000.
1745. Ersoy, Hale, Steigner, Michael L, Coyner, Karl B, Gerhard-Herman, Marie D, Rybicki,
Frank J, Bueno, Raphael, Nguyen, Louis L. Vascular thoracic outlet syndrome: protocol design
and diagnostic value of contrast-enhanced 3D MR angiography and equilibrium phase imaging
on 1. 5-and 3-T MRI scanners. American Journal of Roentgenology; 2012.
1746. Lim, Ruth P, Bruno, Mary, Rosenkrantz, Andrew B, Kim, Danny C, Mulholland, Thomas,
Kwon, Jane, Palfrey, Amy P, Ogedegbe, Olugbenga. Comparison of blood pool and
extracellular gadolinium chelate for functional MR evaluation of vascular thoracic outlet
syndrome. European journal of radiology; 2014.
1747. Singh, Vinay Kumar, Jeyaseelan, Luckshmana, Kyriacou, Steve, Ghosh, Subhojit, Sinisi,
Marco, Fox, Michael. Diagnostic value of magnetic resonance imaging in thoracic outlet
syndrome. Journal of Orthopaedic Surgery; 2014.
1748. Hardy, Alexandre, Pougès, Cécile, Wavreille, Guillaume, Behal, Hélène, Demondion,
Xavier, Lefebvre, Guillaume. Thoracic outlet syndrome: diagnostic accuracy of MRI.
Orthopaedics &amp; Traumatology: Surgery &amp; Research; 2019.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

806

1749. Zhang, Tonghua, Xu, Zhengdao, Chen, Jianxin, Liu, Zongbao, Wang, Tao, Hu, Yijiang,
Shen, Liping, Xue, Feifei. A Novel Approach for Imaging of Thoracic Outlet Syndrome Using
Contrast-Enhanced Magnetic Resonance Angiography (CE-MRA), Short Inversion Time
Inversion Recovery Sampling Perfection with Application-Optimized Contrasts Using Different
Flip Angle Evolutions (T2-STIR-SPACE), and Volumetric Interpolated Breath-Hold Examination
(VIBE). Medical science monitor: international medical journal of experimental and clinical
research; 2019.
1750. Longley, DG, Yedlicka, JW, Molina, EJ, Schwabacher, S, Hunter, DW, Letourneau, JG.
Thoracic outlet syndrome: evaluation of the subclavian vessels by color duplex sonography.
AJR. American journal of roentgenology; 1992.
1751. Molina, J Emesto, D’Cunha, Jonathan. The vascular component in neurogenic-arterial
thoracic outlet syndrome. International Journal of Angiology; 2008.
1752. Fried, Scott M, Nazarian, Levon N. Dynamic neuromusculoskeletal ultrasound
documentation of brachial plexus/thoracic outlet compression during elevated arm stress
testing. Hand; 2013.
1753. Arányi, Zsuzsanna, Csillik, Anita, Böhm, Josef, Schelle, Thomas. Ultrasonographic
identification of fibromuscular bands associated with neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome:
the “wedge-sickle” sign. Ultrasound in medicine &amp; biology; 2016.
1754. Orlando, Megan S, Likes, Kendall C, Mirza, Serene, Cao, Yue, Cohen, Anne, Lum, Ying
Wei, Freischlag, Julie A. Preoperative duplex scanning is a helpful diagnostic tool in neurogenic
thoracic outlet syndrome. Vascular and endovascular surgery; 2016.
1755. Weaver, M Libby, Lum, Ying Wei. New diagnostic and treatment modalities for
neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome. Diagnostics; 2017.
1756. Adam, Garret, Wang, Kevin, Demaree, Christopher J, Jiang, Jenny S, Cheung, Mathew,
Bechara, Carlos F, Lin, Peter H. A prospective evaluation of duplex ultrasound for thoracic
outlet syndrome in high-performance musicians playing bowed string instruments.
Diagnostics; 2018.
1757. Nassar, Nagwa M, Yasaky, Ahmed Z, Farrag, Dina A, Magdy, Medhat M. The value of
neuromuscular ultrasound in relation to clinical and electrophysiological testing in the
diagnosis of thoracic outlet syndrome. Egyptian Rheumatology and Rehabilitation; 2018.
1758. Kim, Tanner I, Sarac, Timur P, Orion, Kristine C. Intravascular ultrasound in venous
thoracic outlet syndrome. Annals of vascular surgery; 2019.
1759. Brownie, Evan R, Abuirqeba, Ahmmad A, Ohman, J Westley, Rubin, Brian G, Thompson,
Robert W. False-negative upper extremity ultrasound in the initial evaluation of patients with
suspected subclavian vein thrombosis due to thoracic outlet syndrome (Paget-Schroetter
syndrome). Journal of Vascular Surgery: Venous and Lymphatic Disorders; 2020.
1760. Pesser, Niels, Teijink, Joep AW, Vervaart, Kimberly, Goeteyn, Jens, Gons, Rob AR, van
Sambeek, Marc RHM, van Nuenen, Bart FL. Value of ultrasound in the diagnosis of neurogenic
thoracic outlet syndrome. European Journal of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery; 2020.
1761. Bishop, Lily, Bartlett, Matthew. Doppler waveform analysis during provocative
manoeuvres in the assessment for arterial thoracic outlet syndrome results in high falsepositive rates; a cross-sectional study. JRSM Cardiovascular Disease; 2021.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

807

1762. Farina, Renato, Foti, Pietro Valerio, Conti, Andrea, Iannace, Francesco Aldo, Pennisi,
Isabella, Fanzone, Luigi, Inì, Corrado, Libra, Federica, Vacirca, Francesco, Failla, Giovanni. The
role of ultrasound imaging in vascular compression syndromes. The Ultrasound Journal; 2021.
1763. Fouasson-Chailloux, Alban, Menu, Pierre, Daley, Pauline, Gautier, Giovanni, Gadbled,
Guillaume, Abraham, Pierre, Dauty, Marc. Subclavian Vessel Compression Assessed by Duplex
Scanning in Patients with Neurogenic Thoracic Outlet Syndrome and No Vascular Signs.
Diagnostics; 2021.
1764. Hu, Jian, Biederman, Robert, Kashyap, Kartikeya, Wilson, John Travis, Farah, Victor,
Franco, Todd, Nguyen, Vinh. Duplex ultrasound in the evaluation of venous and arterial
thoracic outlet syndrome. JRSM open; 2021.
1765. Lindgren, K. A. Conservative treatment of thoracic outlet syndrome: a 2-year follow-up.
Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Apr 1997.
1766. Crosby, C. A., Wehbe, M. A. Conservative treatment for thoracic outlet syndrome. Hand
Clin; Feb 2004.
1767. Hanif, S., Tassadaq, N., Rathore, M. F., Rashid, P., Ahmed, N., Niazi, F. Role of
therapeutic exercises in neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome. J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad;
Oct-Dec 2007.
1768. Kenny, R. A., Traynor, G. B., Withington, D., Keegan, D. J. Thoracic outlet syndrome: a
useful exercise treatment option. Am J Surg; Feb 1993.
1769. Leffert, R. Thoracic outlet syndrome. The Hand; 1991.
1770. Leffert, R. D. Thoracic outlet syndrome. J Am Acad Orthop Surg; Nov 1994.
1771. Sucher, B. M. Thoracic outlet syndrome--a myofascial variant: Part 2. Treatment. J Am
Osteopath Assoc; Sep 1990.
1772. Bilancini, S., Lucchi, M., Tucci, S., Di Rita, L. Postural physiotherapy: a possible
conservative treatment of the thoracic outlet syndrome. Angiologia; Mar-Apr 1992.
1773. Novak, C. B., Collins, E. D., Mackinnon, S. E. Outcome following conservative
management of thoracic outlet syndrome. J Hand Surg Am; Jul 1995.
1774. Novak, C. B., Mackinnon, S. E. Thoracic outlet syndrome. Orthop Clin North Am; Oct
1996.
1775. Walsh, MT. Therapist’s management of brachial plexopathies. Rehabilitation of the
Hand and Upper Extremity. 5th edition. ; 2002.
1776. Tyson, R. R., Kaplan, G. F. Modern concepts of diagnosis and treatment of the thoracic
outlet syndrome. Orthop Clin North Am; Apr 1975.
1777. Liebenson, C. S. Thoracic outlet syndrome: diagnosis and conservative management. J
Manipulative Physiol Ther; Dec 1988.
1778. Anthony, MS. Thoracic outlet syndrome. Hand Rehabilitation: A Practical Guide; 1993.
1779. Buonocore, M,Manstretta,C,Mazzucchi,G,Casale,R. The clinical evaluation of
conservative treatment in patients with the thoracic outlet syndrome. G Ital Med Lav Ergon;
1998.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

808

1780. Peng, J. 16 cases of scalenus syndrome treated by massage and acupoint-injection. J
Tradit Chin Med; Sep 1999.
1781. Gockel, M., Lindholm, H., Vastamaki, M., Lindqvist, A., Viljanen, A. Cardiovascular
functional disorder and distress among patients with thoracic outlet syndrome. J Hand Surg
Br; Feb 1995.
1782. Jamieson, W. G., Chinnick, B. Thoracic outlet syndrome: fact or fancy? A review of 409
consecutive patients who underwent operation. Can J Surg; Aug 1996.
1783. Sultan, S., Evoy, D., Eldin, A. S., Eldeeb, M., Elmehairy, N. Atraumatic acute upper limb
ischemia: a series of 64 patients in a Middle East tertiary vascular center and literature review.
Vasc Surg; May-Jun 2001.
1784. Adams, JT, McEvoy, RK, DeWeese, JA. Primary deep venous thrombosis of upper
extremity. Arch Surg; 1965.
1785. Drapanas, T., Curran, W. L. Thrombectomy in the treatment of &quot;effort&quot;
thrombosis of the axillary and subclavian veins. J Trauma; Jan 1966.
1786. Swinton, N. W.,Jr., Edgett, J. W.,Jr., Hall, R. J. Primary subclavian-axillary vein
thrombosis. Circulation; Oct 1968.
1787. Tilney, M. L., Griffiths, H. J., Edwards, E. A. Natural history of major venous thrombosis
of the upper extremity. Arch Surg; Dec 1970.
1788. Dalal, A. R., Pitney, W. R. Primary thrombosis of the axillary-subclavian veins. Med J
Aust; Mar 25 1972.
1789. Prescott, S. M., Tikoff, G. Deep venous thrombosis of the upper extremity: a reappraisal.
Circulation; Feb 1979.
1790. Campbell, C. B., Chandler, J. G., Tegtmeyer, C. J., Bernstein, E. F. Axillary, subclavian,
and brachiocephalic vein obstruction. Surgery; Dec 1977.
1791. Gloviczki, P, Kazmier, RJ, Hollier, LH. Axillary-subclavian venous occlusion. J Vasc Surg;
1986.
1792. Ameli, F. M., Minas, T., Weiss, M., Provan, J. L. Consequences of
&quot;conservative&quot; conventional management of axillary vein thrombosis. Can J Surg;
May 1987.
1793. Brochner, G., Rojas, M., Armas, A. J., Pereira, J. A., Mayall, R. C., Mayall, A. C., Mayall, J.
C. Axillary-subclavian venous thrombosis. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino); Jan-Feb 1989.
1794. de León, RA, Chang, DC, Hassoun, HT, Black, JH, Roseborough, GS, Perler, BA, RotelliniColtvet, L, Call, D, Busse, C, Freischlag, JA. Multiple treatment algorithms for successful
outcomes in venous thoracic outlet syndrome. Surgery; 2009.
1795. Becker, G. J., Holden, R. W., Rabe, F. E., Castaneda-Zuniga, W. R., Sears, N., Dilley, R. S.,
Glover, J. L. Local thrombolytic therapy for subclavian and axillary vein thrombosis. Treatment
of the thoracic inlet syndrome. Radiology; Nov 1983.
1796. Taylor, L. M.,Jr., McAllister, W. R., Dennis, D. L., Porter, J. M. Thrombolytic therapy
followed by first rib resection for spontaneous (&quot;effort&quot;) subclavian vein
thrombosis. Am J Surg; May 1985.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

809

1797. Druy, EM, Trout, HHIII, Giordano, JM, Hix, WR. Lytic therapy in treatment of axillary and
subclavian vein thrombosis. J Vasc Surg; 1985.
1798. Vogel, C. M., Jensen, J. E. &quot;Effort&quot; thrombosis of the subclavian vein in a
competitive swimmer. Am J Sports Med; Jul-Aug 1985.
1799. Smith-Behn, J., Althar, R., Katz, W. Primary thrombosis of the axillary/subclavian vein.
South Med J; Sep 1986.
1800. Huey, H., Morris, D. C., Nichols, D. M., Connell, D. G., Fry, P. D. Low-dose streptokinase
thrombolysis of axillary-subclavian vein thrombosis. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol; 1987.
1801. Landercasper, J., Gall, W., Fischer, M., Boyd, W. C., Dahlberg, P. J., Kisken, W. A., Boland,
T. Thrombolytic therapy of axillary-subclavian venous thrombosis. Arch Surg; Sep 1987.
1802. O'Leary, M. R., Smith, M. S., Druy, E. M. Diagnostic and therapeutic approach to axillarysubclavian vein thrombosis. Ann Emerg Med; Aug 1987.
1803. Shuttleworth, R. D., van der Merwe, D. M., Mitchell, W. L. Subclavian vein stenosis and
axillary vein &#x27;effort thrombosis&#x27;. Age and the first rib bypass collateral,
thrombolytic therapy and first rib resection. S Afr Med J; May 2 1987.
1804. Wiles, P. G., Birtwell, A. J., Davies, J. A., Chennells, P. Subclavian vein notch: a
phlebographic abnormality associated with subclavian-axillary vein thrombosis. Br J Hosp
Med; Apr 1987.
1805. DeWeese, J. A., Adams, J. T., Gaiser, D. L. Subclavian venous thrombectomy. Circulation;
May 1970.
1806. Gaylis, H. A rational approach to venous thrombectomy. Surg Gynecol Obstet; Jun 1974.
1807. Dale, W. A. Thoracic outlet compression syndrome. Critique in 1982. Arch Surg; Nov
1982.
1808. Mingoli, A., Feldhaus, R. J., Farina, C., Cavallari, N., Sapienza, P., di Marzo, L., Cavallaro,
A. Long-term outcome after transaxillary approach for thoracic outlet syndrome. Surgery; Nov
1995.
1809. Sanders, R. J., Hammond, S. L. Management of cervical ribs and anomalous first ribs
causing neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome. J Vasc Surg; Jul 2002.
1810. Degeorges, R., Reynaud, C., Becquemin, J. P. Thoracic outlet syndrome surgery: longterm functional results. Ann Vasc Surg; Sep 2004.
1811. Sharp, W. J., Nowak, L. R., Zamani, T., Kresowik, T. F., Hoballah, J. J., Ballinger, B. A.,
Corson, J. D. Long-term follow-up and patient satisfaction after surgery for thoracic outlet
syndrome. Ann Vasc Surg; Jan 2001.
1812. Nakatsuchi, Y., Saitoh, S., Hosaka, M., Matsuda, S. Conservative treatment of thoracic
outlet syndrome using an orthosis. J Hand Surg Br; Feb 1995.
1813. Christo, P. J., Christo, D. K., Carinci, A. J., Freischlag, J. A. Single CT-guided
chemodenervation of the anterior scalene muscle with botulinum toxin for neurogenic
thoracic outlet syndrome. Pain Med; Apr 2010.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

810

1814. Finlayson, H. C., O'Connor, R. J., Brasher, P. M. A., Travlos, A. Botulinum toxin injection
for management of thoracic outlet syndrome: a double-blind, randomized, controlled trial.
Pain; Sep 2011.
1815. Foley, J. M., Finlayson, H., Travlos, A. A review of thoracic outlet syndrome and the
possible role of botulinum toxin in the treatment of this syndrome. Toxins (Basel); Nov 7 2012.
1816. Godoy, Ivan RB, Donahue, Dean M, Torriani, Martin. Botulinum toxin injections in
musculoskeletal disorders. Seminars in musculoskeletal radiology; 2016.
1817. Lee, G. W., Kwon, Y. H., Jeong, J. H., Kim, J. W. The efficacy of scalene injection in
thoracic outlet syndrome. J Korean Neurosurg Soc; Jul 2011.
1818. Weaver, M. L., Hicks, C. W., Fritz, J., Black, J. H.,3rd, Lum, Y. W. Local Anesthetic Block
of the Anterior Scalene Muscle Increases Muscle Height in Patients With Neurogenic Thoracic
Outlet Syndrome. Ann Vasc Surg; Aug 2019.
1819. Jacobson, J. H., Haimov, M. Venous revascularization of the arm: report of three cases.
Surgery; May 1977.
1820. Aziz, S,Straehley,CJ,Whelan,TJ,Jr. Effort-related axillosubclavian vein thrombosis. A new
theory of pathogenesis and a plea for direct surgical intervention. Am J Surg; 1986.
1821. Inahara, T. Surgical treatment of &quot;effort&quot; thrombosis of the axillary and
subclavian veins. Am Surg; Jul 1968.
1822. Rabinowitz, R., Goldfarb, D. Surgical treatment of axillosubclavian venous thrombosis:
a case report. Surgery; Nov 1971.
1823. Pittam, M. R., Darke, S. G. The place of first rib resection in the management of axillarysubclavian vein thrombosis. Eur J Vasc Surg; Feb 1987.
1824. Jain, K. M., Smejkal, R. Use of spiral vein graft to bypass occluded subclavian vein. J
Cardiovasc Surg (Torino); Sep-Oct 1988.
1825. Etheredge, S., Wilbur, B., Stoney, R. J. Thoracic outlet syndrome. Am J Surg; Jul 1979.
1826. Siegel, R. S., Steichen, F. M. Cervicothoracic outlet syndrome. Vascular compression
caused by congenital abnormality of thoracic ribs. A case report. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Sep
1967.
1827. Adams, JT, DeWeese, JA, Mahoney, EB, Rob, CG. Intermittent subclavian vein
obstruction without thrombosis. Surgery; 1968.
1828. Gergoudis, R., Barnes, R. W. Thoracic outlet arterial compression: prevalence in normal
persons. Angiology; Aug 1980.
1829. Urschel, H. C.,Jr., Razzuk, M. A. Improved management of the Paget-Schroetter
syndrome secondary to thoracic outlet compression. Ann Thorac Surg; Dec 1991.
1830. Pupka, A., Rucinski, A., Skora, J., Janczak, D., Pawlowski, S., Kaluza, G., Dawiskiba, T.,
Szyber, P. The treatment of subclavian artery compression with the use of ringed
polytetrafluoroethylene vascular prostheses. Polim Med; 2004.
1831. Mercier, C. The thoraco-brachial passage syndrome. Value of resection of the 1st rib.
Chirurgie; May 2 1973.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

811

1832. Glass, B. A. The relationship of axillary venous thrombosis to the thoracic outlet
compression syndrome. Ann Thorac Surg; Jun 1975.
1833. Salo, J. A., Varstela, E., Ketonen, P., Ala-Kulju, K., Luosto, R. Management of vascular
complications in thoracic outlet syndrome. Acta Chir Scand; May-Jun 1988.
1834. Lord, JW, Urschel, HC Jr. Total claviculectomy. Surg Rounds; 1988.
1835. Pairolero, P. C., Walls, J. T., Payne, W. S., Hollier, L. H., Fairbairn, J. F.,2nd. Subclavianaxillary artery aneurysms. Surgery; Oct 1981.
1836. McLaughlin, CW, Popma, AM. Intermittent obstruction of the subclavian vein. JAMA;
1939.
1837. McCleery, RS, Kesterson, JE, Kirtley, JA, Love, RB. Subclavius and anterior scalene
muscle compression as a cause of intermittent obstruction of the subclavian vein. Ann Surg;
1951.
1838. Daskalakis, E., Bouhoutsos, J. Subclavian and axillary vein compression of
musculoskeletal origin. Br J Surg; Aug 1980.
1839. Washington State Department of Labor and Industries. Medical Treatment Guidelines Work-Related Neurogenic Thoracic Outlet Syndrome: Diagnosis and Treatment. Available at:
http://www. lni. wa. gov/ClaimsIns/Files/OMD/MedTreat/ThoracicOutletNeurogenic. pdf.
2010.
1840. Roos, D. B. Transaxillary approach for first rib resection to relieve thoracic outlet
syndrome. Ann Surg; Mar 1966.
1841. Murphy, T. Brachial neuritis caused by pressure of first rib. Aust Med J; 1910.
1842. Clagett, 0T. Presidential address: research and prosearch. J Thoracic Cardiovascular
Surg; 1962.
1843. Molina, J. E. Combined posterior and transaxillary approach for neurogenic thoracic
outlet syndrome. J Am Coll Surg; Jul 1998.
1844. Edwards, D. P., Mulkern, E., Raja, A. N., Barker, P. Trans-axillary first rib excision for
thoracic outlet syndrome. J R Coll Surg Edinb; Dec 1999.
1845. Toso, C., Robert, J., Berney, T., Pugin, F., Spiliopoulos, A. Thoracic outlet syndrome:
influence of personal history and surgical technique on long-term results. Eur J Cardiothorac
Surg; Jul 1999.
1846. McCarthy, M. J., Varty, K., London, N. J., Bell, P. R. Experience of supraclavicular
exploration and decompression for treatment of thoracic outlet syndrome. Ann Vasc Surg;
May 1999.
1847. Sanders, R. J. Results of the surgical treatment for thoracic outlet syndrome. Semin
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg; Apr 1996.
1848. Donaghy, M., Matkovic, Z., Morris, P. Surgery for suspected neurogenic thoracic outlet
syndromes: a follow up study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry; Nov 1999.
1849. Mattson, R. J. Surgical approach to anterior scalenectomy. Hand Clin; Feb 2004.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

812

1850. Qvarfordt, P. G., Ehrenfeld, W. K., Stoney, R. J. Supraclavicular radical scalenectomy and
transaxillary first rib resection for the thoracic outlet syndrome. A combined approach. Am J
Surg; Jul 1984.
1851. Roos, D. B. The place for scalenectomy and first-rib resection in thoracic outlet
syndrome. Surgery; Dec 1982.
1852. Sheth, R. N., Campbell, J. N. Surgical treatment of thoracic outlet syndrome: a
randomized trial comparing two operations. J Neurosurg Spine; Nov 2005.
1853. Green, R. M., McNamara, J., Ouriel, K. Long-term follow-up after thoracic outlet
decompression: an analysis of factors determining outcome. J Vasc Surg; Dec 1991.
1854. Goff, C. D., Parent, F. N., Sato, D. T., Robinson, K. D., Gregory, R. T., Gayle, R. G., Demasi,
R. J., Meier, G. H., Reid, J. W.,Jr., Wheeler, J. R. A comparison of surgery for neurogenic
thoracic outlet syndrome between laborers and nonlaborers. Am J Surg; Aug 1998.
1855. Mailis, A., Papagapiou, M., Vanderlinden, R. G., Campbell, V., Taylor, A. Thoracic outlet
syndrome after motor vehicle accidents in a Canadian pain clinic population. Clin J Pain; Dec
1995.
1856. Atasoy, E. Recurrent thoracic outlet syndrome. Hand Clin; 2004.
1857. Chang, Edward S. Accuracy of magnetic resonance imaging in predicting the
intraoperative tear characteristics of pectoralis major ruptures. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow
Surgery; 2016.
1858. Wise, PM,Ptasinski,AM,Gallo,RA. Pectoralis Major Ruptures in the National Football
League: Incidence, RTP, and Performance Analysis. Orthop J Sports Med; 2021.
1859. Bodendorfer, B. M., McCormick, B. P., Wang, D. X., Looney, A. M., Conroy, C. M., Fryar,
C. M., Kotler, J. A., Ferris, W. J., Postma, W. F., Chang, E. S. Treatment of Pectoralis Major
Tendon Tears: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Operative and Nonoperative
Treatment. Orthop J Sports Med; Feb 2020.
1860. Hauschild, VD,Forrest,LJ,Hirleman,C,et al. Pectoralis Major Injuries in the Army, CY 2016
Active Duty Army APHC PHIP No. 12-03-0719. Army Public Health Ctr; 2019.
1861. Salazar, D., Shakir, I., Joe, K., Choate, W. S. Acute Pectoralis Major Tears in Forward
Deployed Active Duty U. S. Military Personnel: A Population at Risk?. J Surg Orthop Adv;
Summer 2019.
1862. Shaw, K. A., Brown, S., Moreland, C. M., Antosh, I. J., Parada, S. A. Parachute-Induced
Pectoralis Major Tears in Military Servicemembers: What Is the Functional Recovery?. Orthop
J Sports Med; Jun 2021.
1863. Crass, J. R., Craig, E. V., Bretzke, C., Feinberg, S. B. Ultrasonography of the rotator cuff.
Radiographics; Nov 1985.
1864. Kirkley, A., Griffin, S., Richards, C., Miniaci, A., Mohtadi, N. Prospective randomized
clinical trial comparing the effectiveness of immediate arthroscopic stabilization versus
immobilization and rehabilitation in first traumatic anterior dislocations of the shoulder.
Arthroscopy; Jul-Aug 1999.
1865. Sherbondy, P. S., McFarland, E.G. Shoulder instability in the athlete. Phys Med Rehabil
Clin N Am; Nov 2000.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

813

1866. Reinold, M. M., Wilk, K. E., Hooks, T. R., Dugas, J. R., Andrews, J. R. Thermal-assisted
capsular shrinkage of the glenohumeral joint in overhead athletes: a 15- to 47-month followup. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther; Aug 2003.
1867. Kakar, S., Voloshin, I., Kaye, E. K., Crivello, K., Edgar, C. M., Edmond, C. M., Pryor, J. D.,
Schepsis, A. A. Posterior shoulder instability: comprehensive analysis of open and
arthroscopic approaches. Am J Orthop; Dec 2007.
1868. Hovelius, L. Anterior dislocation of the shoulder in teen-agers and young adults. Fiveyear prognosis. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Mar 1987.
1869. Simonet, W. T., Melton, L. J.,3rd, Cofield, R. H., Ilstrup, D. M. Incidence of anterior
shoulder dislocation in Olmsted County, Minnesota. Clinical Orthopaedics And Related
Research; Jun 1984.
1870. Kirkley, S. Primary anterior dislocation of the shoulder in young patients. A ten-year
prospective study. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Feb 1998.
1871. Good, C. R., MacGillivray, J. D. Traumatic shoulder dislocation in the adolescent athlete:
advances in surgical treatment. Curr Opin Pediatr; Feb 2005.
1872. Dalton, S. E., Snyder, S. J. Glenohumeral instability. Baillieres Clin Rheumatol; Dec 1989.
1873. Friedman, R. J., Blocker, E. R., Morrow, D. L. Glenohumeral instability. J South Orthop
Assoc; Fall 1995.
1874. Aronen, J. G., Regan, K. Decreasing the incidence of recurrence of first time anterior
shoulder dislocations with rehabilitation. Am J Sports Med; Jul-Aug 1984.
1875. Burkhead, W. Z.,Jr., Rockwood, C. A.,Jr. Treatment of instability of the shoulder with an
exercise program. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jul 1992.
1876. Hovelius, L., Augustini, B. G., Fredin, H., Johansson, O., Norlin, R., Thorling, J. Primary
anterior dislocation of the shoulder in young patients. A ten-year prospective study. J Bone
Joint Surg Am; Nov 1996.
1877. Liu, S. H., Henry, M. H., Nuccion, S., Shapiro, M. S., Dorey, F. Diagnosis of glenoid labral
tears. A comparison between magnetic resonance imaging and clinical examinations. Am J
Sports Med; Mar-Apr 1996.
1878. Line, L, Murret, L. Labral tears: diagnosis, treatment and rehabilitation. Athletic Therapy
Today; Jul 1999.
1879. Wen, D. Y. Current concepts in the treatment of anterior shoulder dislocations. Am J
Emerg Med; Jul 1999.
1880. Bottoni, C. R., Wilckens, J. H., DeBerardino, T. M., D'Alleyrand, J. C., Rooney, R. C.,
Harpstrite, J. K., Arciero, R. A. A prospective, randomized evaluation of arthroscopic
stabilization versus nonoperative treatment in patients with acute, traumatic, first-time
shoulder dislocations. Am J Sports Med; Jul-Aug 2002.
1881. Kirkley, A., Werstine, R., Ratjek, A., Griffin, S. Prospective randomized clinical trial
comparing the effectiveness of immediate arthroscopic stabilization versus immobilization
and rehabilitation in first traumatic anterior dislocations of the shoulder: long-term
evaluation. Arthroscopy; Jan 2005.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

814

1882. Jakobsen, B. W., Johannsen, H. V., Suder, P., Sojbjerg, J. O. Primary repair versus
conservative treatment of first-time traumatic anterior dislocation of the shoulder: a
randomized study with 10-year follow-up. Arthroscopy; Feb 2007.
1883. Robinson, C. M., Jenkins, P. J., White, T. O., Ker, A., Will, E. Primary arthroscopic
stabilization for a first-time anterior dislocation of the shoulder. A randomized, double-blind
trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Apr 2008.
1884. Larrain, M. V., Botto, G. J., Montenegro, H. J., Mauas, D. M. Arthroscopic repair of acute
traumatic anterior shoulder dislocation in young athletes. Arthroscopy; Apr 2001.
1885. Edmonds, G., Kirkley, A., Birmingham, T. B., Fowler, P. J. The effect of early arthroscopic
stabilization compared to nonsurgical treatment on proprioception after primary traumatic
anterior dislocation of the shoulder. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc; Mar 2003.
1886. Whitehead, N,Mohammed,K,Fulcher,M. Does the Beighton score correlate with specific
measures of shoulder joint laxity?. Orthop J Sports Med; 2018.
1887. White, A,Patel,N,Hadley,C,Dodson,C. An Algorithmic Approach to the Management of
Shoulder Instability. J Am Acad Orthop Surg Glob Res Rev; 2019.
1888. Provencher, M,Bhatia,S,Ghodadra,N. Recurrent shoulder instability: Current concepts
for evaluation and management of glenoid bone loss. J Bone Joint Surg Am; 2010.
1889. Wang, S. Management of the First-time Traumatic Anterior Shoulder Dislocation. Clin
Shoulder Elb; 2018.
1890. Zamora-Navas, P., Borras Verdera, A., Porras Garcia, J., Padilla Marquez, A., Linares, P.
Long-term results of the Boytchev procedure for the treatment of recurrent dislocation of the
shoulder. Acta Orthop Belg; Jun 2001.
1891. Taylor, DC,Arciero,RA. Pathologic changes associated with shoulder dislocations:
Arthroscopic and physical examination findings in first-time, traumatic anterior dislocations.
Am J Sports Med; 1997.
1892. Yiannakopoulos, CK,Mataragas,E,Antonogiannakis,E. A comparison of the spectrum of
intra-articular lesions in acute and chronic anterior shoulder instability. Arthroscopy; 2007.
1893. Palmer, I,Widén,A. The bone block method for recurrent dislocation of the shoulder
joint. J Bone Joint Surg Br; 1948.
1894. Burkhart, S,DeBeer,J. Traumatic glenohumeral bone defects and their relationship to
failure of arthroscopic Bankart repairs: Significance of the inverted-pear glenoid and the
humeral engaging Hill-Sachs lesion. Arthroscopy; 2000.
1895. Bishop, J,Jones,G,Rerko,M,Donaldson,C. 3-D CT is the most reliable imaging modality
when quantifying glenoid bone loss. Clin Orthop Relat Res; 2013.
1896. Blanchard, T. K., Bearcroft, P. W., Maibaum, A., Hazelman, B. L., Sharma, S., Dixon, A. K.
Magnetic resonance imaging or arthrography for shoulder problems: a randomised study.
European Journal of Radiology; 1999.
1897. Weber, AE,Trasolini,NA,Mayer,EN,et al. Injections Prior to Rotator Cuff Repair Are
Associated With Increased Rotator Cuff Revision Rates. Arthroscopy; 2019.
1898. Agarwalla, A,Puzzitiello,RN,Mascarenhas,R,et al. Preoperative Injections May Be an
Iatrogenic Cause of Reoperation After Arthroscopic Rotator Cuff Repair. Arthroscopy; 2019.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

815

1899. Traven SA, Brinton D,Simpson KN,et al. Preoperative Shoulder Injections Are Associated
With Increased Risk of Revision Rotator Cuff Repair. Arthroscopy; 2019.
1900. Desai, VS,Camp,CL,Boddapati,V,et al. Increasing Numbers of Shoulder Corticosteroid
Injections Within a Year Preoperatively May Be Associated With a Higher Rate of Subsequent
Revision Rotator Cuff Surgery. Arthroscopy; 2019.
1901. Kiviluoto, O,Pasila,M,Jaroma,H,et al. Immobilization after primary dislocation of the
shoulder. Acta Orthop Scand; 1980.
1902. Itoi, E,Hatakeyama,Y,Kido,T,et al. A new method of immobilization after traumatic
anterior dislocation of the shoulder: a preliminary study. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; 2003.
1903. Itoi, E,Hatakeyama,Y,Sato,T,et al. Immobilization in external rotation after shoulder
dislocation reduces the risk of recurrence. A randomized controlled trial. J Bone Joint Surg
Am; 2007.
1904. Gaballah, A,Zeyada,M,Elgeidi,A,et al. Six-week physical rehabilitation protocol for
anterior shoulder dislocation in athletes. J Exerc Rehabil; 2017.
1905. Riccio, I,de Sire,A,Latte,C,et al. Conservative treatment of traumatic shoulder
instability: a case series study. Musculoskelet Surg; 2015.
1906. Rowe, C. R. Prognosis in dislocations of the shoulder. The Journal Of Bone And Joint
Surgery American Volume; Oct 1956.
1907. McLaughlin, H. L., MacLellan, D. I. Recurrent anterior dislocation of the shoulder. II. A
comparative study. J Trauma; Mar 1967.
1908. Kazar, B., Relovszky, E. Prognosis of primary dislocation of the shoulder. Acta Orthop
Scand; 1969.
1909. Rowe, C. R., Patel, D., Southmayd, W. W. The Bankart procedure: a long-term end-result
study. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jan 1978.
1910. Kiviluoto, O., Pasila, M., Jaroma, H., Sundholm, A. Immobilization after primary
dislocation of the shoulder. Acta Orthop Scand; Dec 1980.
1911. Yoneda. Conservative treatment of shoulder dislocation in young males. J Bone Joint
Surg; 1982.
1912. Hovelius, L., Eriksson, K., Fredin, H., Hagberg, G., Hussenius, A., Lind, B., Thorling, J.,
Weckstrom, J. Recurrences after initial dislocation of the shoulder. Results of a prospective
study of treatment. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Mar 1983.
1913. Hovelius, L., Lind, B., Thorling, J. Primary dislocation of the shoulder. Factors affecting
the two-year prognosis. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Jun 1983.
1914. Hovelius, L. Shoulder dislocation in Swedish ice hockey players. Am J Sports Med; NovDec 1978.
1915. Thomas, S. C., Matsen, F. A.,3rd. An approach to the repair of avulsion of the
glenohumeral ligaments in the management of traumatic anterior glenohumeral instability.
The Journal Of Bone And Joint Surgery American Volume; Apr 1989.
1916. Wheeler, J. H., Ryan, J. B., Arciero, R. A., Molinari, R. N. Arthroscopic versus
nonoperative treatment of acute shoulder dislocations in young athletes. Arthroscopy; 1989.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

816

1917. Hoelen, M. A., Burgers, A. M., Rozing, P. M. Prognosis of primary anterior shoulder
dislocation in young adults. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg; 1990.
1918. Arciero, R. A., Wheeler, J. H., Ryan, J. B., McBride, J. T. Arthroscopic Bankart repair
versus nonoperative treatment for acute, initial anterior shoulder dislocations. Am J Sports
Med; Sep-Oct 1994.
1919. Arciero, R. A., St Pierre, P. Acute shoulder dislocation. Indications and techniques for
operative management. Clin Sports Med; Oct 1995.
1920. DeBerardino, T. M., Arciero, R. A., Taylor, D. C. Arthroscopic stabilization of acute initial
anterior shoulder dislocation: the West Point experience. J South Orthop Assoc; Winter 1996.
1921. DeBerardino, T. M., Arciero, R. A., Taylor, D. C., Uhorchak, J. M. Prospective evaluation
of arthroscopic stabilization of acute, initial anterior shoulder dislocations in young athletes.
Two- to five-year follow-up. Am J Sports Med; Sep-Oct 2001.
1922. Salmon, J. M., Bell, S. N. Arthroscopic stabilization of the shoulder for acute primary
dislocations using a transglenoid suture technique. Arthroscopy; Mar 1998.
1923. Valentin, A., Winge, S., Engstrom, B. Early arthroscopic treatment of primary traumatic
anterior shoulder dislocation. A follow-up study. Scand J Med Sci Sports; Dec 1998.
1924. O'Neill, D. B. Arthroscopic Bankart repair of anterior detachments of the glenoid
labrum. A prospective study. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Oct 1999.
1925. Wintzell, G., Haglund-Akerlind, Y., Ekelund, A., Sandstrom, B., Hovelius, L., Larsson, S.
Arthroscopic lavage reduced the recurrence rate following primary anterior shoulder
dislocation. A randomised multicentre study with 1-year follow-up. Knee Surg Sports
Traumatol Arthrosc; 1999.
1926. Handoll, H. H., Almaiyah, M. A., Rangan, A. Surgical versus non-surgical treatment for
acute anterior shoulder dislocation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2004.
1927. Brophy, R. H., Marx, R. G. The treatment of traumatic anterior instability of the
shoulder: nonoperative and surgical treatment. Arthroscopy; Mar 2009.
1928. Hurley, ET,Manjunath,AK,Bloom,DA,et al. Arthroscopic Bankart Repair Versus
Conservative Management for First-Time Traumatic Anterior Shoulder Instability: A
Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Arthroscopy; 2020.
1929. van Spanning, SH,Verweij,LPE,Priester-Vink,S,et al. Operative Versus Nonoperative
Treatment Following First-Time Anterior Shoulder Dislocation: A Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis. JBJS Rev; 2021.
1930. Stefko, J. M., Tibone, J. E., Cawley, P. W., ElAttrache, N. E., McMahon, P. J. Strain of the
anterior band of the inferior glenohumeral ligament during capsule failure. J Shoulder Elbow
Surg; Sep-Oct 1997.
1931. Taylor, D. C., Arciero, R. A. Pathologic changes associated with shoulder dislocations.
Arthroscopic and physical examination findings in first-time, traumatic anterior dislocations.
Am J Sports Med; May-Jun 1997.
1932. Angelo, R. L. Controversies in arthroscopic shoulder surgery: arthroscopic versus open
bankart repair, thermal treatment of capsular tissue, acromioplasties--are they necessary?.
Arthroscopy; Dec 2003.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

817

1933. Morgan, C. D., Bodenstab, A. B. Arthroscopic Bankart suture repair: technique and early
results. Arthroscopy; 1987.
1934. Wiley, A. M. Arthroscopy for shoulder instability and a technique for arthroscopic
repair. Arthroscopy; 1988.
1935. Wolf, E, . Arthroscopic anterior shoulder capsulorrhaphy. Techniques in Orthopaedics;
1988.
1936. Caspari, R. B. Arthroscopy--an orthopaedic surgical subspecialty or a technique?.
Arthroscopy; 1991.
1937. Coughlin, L., Rubinovich, M., Johansson, J., White, B., Greenspoon, J. Arthroscopic
staple capsulorrhaphy for anterior shoulder instability. Am J Sports Med; May-Jun 1992.
1938. Landsiedl, F. Arthroscopic therapy of recurrent anterior luxation of the shoulder by
capsular repair. Arthroscopy; 1992.
1939. Grana, W. A., Buckley, P. D., Yates, C. K. Arthroscopic Bankart suture repair. Am J Sports
Med; May-Jun 1993.
1940. Hurley, J., Bronstein, R. Shoulder arthroscopy in the athlete. Practical applications.
Sports Med; Feb 1993.
1941. Lane, J. G., Sachs, R. A., Riehl, B. Arthroscopic staple capsulorrhaphy: a long-term followup. Arthroscopy; 1993.
1942. Altchek, D. W. Arthroscopy of the shoulder. Scand J Med Sci Sports; Apr 1995.
1943. Hintermann, B., Gachter, A. Arthroscopic findings after shoulder dislocation. Am J
Sports Med; Sep-Oct 1995.
1944. Sandow, M. J. Arthroscopic repair for primary shoulder dislocation: A randomized
clinical trial. J Bone Joint Surg Br; 1995.
1945. Swenson, T. M., Warner, J. J. Arthroscopic shoulder stabilization. Overview of
indications, technique, and efficacy. Clin Sports Med; Oct 1995.
1946. Walch, G., Boileau, P., Levigne, C., Mandrino, A., Neyret, P., Donell, S. Arthroscopic
stabilization for recurrent anterior shoulder dislocation: results of 59 cases. Arthroscopy; Apr
1995.
1947. Wall, M. S., O'Brien, S. J. Arthroscopic evaluation of the unstable shoulder. Clin Sports
Med; Oct 1995.
1948. Guanche, C. A., Quick, D. C., Sodergren, K. M., Buss, D. D. Arthroscopic versus open
reconstruction of the shoulder in patients with isolated Bankart lesions. Am J Sports Med;
Mar-Apr 1996.
1949. Long, J. S. Shoulder arthroscopy. Orthop Nurs; Mar-Apr 1996.
1950. Rose, D. J. Arthroscopic transglenoid suture capsulorrhaphy for anterior shoulder
instability. Instr Course Lect; 1996.
1951. Sandow, MJ. Acute arthroscopic Bankart repair for initial anterior shoulder dislocation:
a prospective clinical trial. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; 1996.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

818

1952. Geiger, D. F., Hurley, J. A., Tovey, J. A., Rao, J. P. Results of arthroscopic versus open
Bankart suture repair. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Apr 1997.
1953. McIntyre, L. F., Caspari, R. B., Savoie, F. H. The arthroscopic treatment of anterior and
multidirectional shoulder instability. Instr Course Lect; 1996.
1954. Resch, H., Povacz, P., Wambacher, M., Sperner, G., Golser, K. Arthroscopic extraarticular Bankart repair for the treatment of recurrent anterior shoulder dislocation.
Arthroscopy; Apr 1997.
1955. Copeland, S. Arthroscopy and arthroscopic surgery of the shoulder. Br J Theatre Nurs;
Jun 1998.
1956. Steinbeck, J., Liljenqvist, U., Jerosch, J. The anatomy of the glenohumeral ligamentous
complex and its contribution to anterior shoulder stability. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Mar-Apr
1998.
1957. De Mulder, K., Petre, D., Declercq, G. Arthroscopy of the shoulder. Current concepts
review. Acta Orthop Belg; Dec 1999.
1958. Antoniou, J., Harryman, D. T.,2nd. Arthroscopic posterior capsular repair. Clin Sports
Med; Jan 2000.
1959. Cole, B. J., Warner, J. J. Arthroscopic versus open Bankart repair for traumatic anterior
shoulder instability. Clin Sports Med; Jan 2000.
1960. Nelson, B. J., Arciero, R. A. Arthroscopic management of glenohumeral instability. Am J
Sports Med; Jul-Aug 2000.
1961. Mayfield, J. B., Carter, C., Wang, C., Warner, J. J. Arthroscopic shoulder reconstruction:
fast-track recovery and outpatient treatment. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Sep 2001.
1962. Rook, R. T., Savoie, F. H.,3rd, Field, L. D. Arthroscopic treatment of instability
attributable to capsular injury or laxity. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Sep 2001.
1963. Nebelung, W., Jaeger, A., Wiedemann, E. Rationales of arthroscopic shoulder
stabilization. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg; Nov 2002.
1964. Stein, D. A., Jazrawi, L., Bartolozzi, A. R. Arthroscopic stabilization of anterior shoulder
instability: a review of the literature. Arthroscopy; Oct 2002.
1965. Millett, P. J., Clavert, P., Warner, J. J. Arthroscopic management of anterior, posterior,
and multidirectional shoulder instability: pearls and pitfalls. Arthroscopy; Dec 2003.
1966. Ryu, R. K. Arthroscopic approach to traumatic anterior shoulder instability. Arthroscopy;
Dec 2003.
1967. Stokes, D. A., Savoie, F. H.,3rd, Field, L. D., Ramsey, J. R. Arthroscopic repair of anterior
glenohumeral instability and rotator interval lesions. Orthop Clin North Am; Oct 2003.
1968. Chen, L,Xu,Z,Peng,J,et al. Effectiveness and safety of arthroscopic versus open Bankart
repair for recurrent anterior shoulder dislocation: a meta-analysis of clinical trial data. Arch
Orthopaedic Trauma Surg; 2015.
1969. Freedman, K. B., Smith, A. P., Romeo, A. A., Cole, B. J., Bach, B. R.,Jr. Open Bankart repair
versus arthroscopic repair with transglenoid sutures or bioabsorbable tacks for Recurrent
Anterior instability of the shoulder: a meta-analysis. Am J Sports Med; Sep 2004.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

819

1970. Robinson, C. M., Dobson, R. J. Anterior instability of the shoulder after trauma. J Bone
Joint Surg Br; May 2004.
1971. Levine, W. N., Rieger, K., McCluskey, G. M.,3rd. Arthroscopic treatment of anterior
shoulder instability. Instr Course Lect; 2005.
1972. Budoff, J. E., Wolf, E. M. Arthroscopic treatment of glenohumeral instability. J Hand
Surg Am; Oct 2006.
1973. Hobby, J., Griffin, D., Dunbar, M., Boileau, P. Is arthroscopic surgery for stabilisation of
chronic shoulder instability as effective as open surgery? A systematic review and metaanalysis of 62 studies including 3044 arthroscopic operations. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Sep 2007.
1974. Kropf, E. J., Tjoumakaris, F. P., Sekiya, J. K. Arthroscopic shoulder stabilization: is there
ever a need to open?. Arthroscopy; Jul 2007.
1975. Pulavarti, RS, Symes, TH, Rangan, A. Surgical interventions for shoulder instability in
adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2009.
1976. Friedman, L. G., Griesser, M. J., Miniaci, A. A., Jones, M. H. Recurrent instability after
revision anterior shoulder stabilization surgery. Arthroscopy; Mar 2014.
1977. Bankart, A, . The pathology and treatment of recurrent dislocation of the shoulder-joint.
British Journal of Surgery; 1938.
1978. Hovelius, L., Thorling, J., Fredin, H. Recurrent anterior dislocation of the shoulder.
Results after the Bankart and Putti-Platt operations. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jun 1979.
1979. Ejerhed, L., Kartus, J., Funck, E., Kohler, K., Sernert, N., Karlsson, J. A clinical and
radiographic comparison of absorbable and non-absorbable suture anchors in open shoulder
stabilisation. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc; 2000.
1980. Itoi, E., Watanabe, W., Yamada, S., Shimizu, T., Wakabayashi, I. Range of motion after
Bankart repair. Vertical compared with horizontal capsulotomy. Am J Sports Med; Jul-Aug
2001.
1981. Karlsson, J., Magnusson, L., Ejerhed, L., Hultenheim, I., Lundin, O., Kartus, J. Comparison
of open and arthroscopic stabilization for recurrent shoulder dislocation in patients with a
Bankart lesion. Am J Sports Med; Sep-Oct 2001.
1982. Caprise, P. A.,Jr., Sekiya, J. K. Open and arthroscopic treatment of multidirectional
instability of the shoulder. Arthroscopy; Oct 2006.
1983. Provencher, M. T., Romeo, A. A. Posterior and multidirectional instability of the
shoulder: challenges associated with diagnosis and management. Instr Course Lect; 2008.
1984. Handoll, Helen, Brealey, Stephen, Rangan, Amar, Keding, Ada, Corbacho, Belen,
Jefferson, Laura, Chuang, Ling-Hsiang, Goodchild, Lorna, Hewitt, Catherine, Torgerson, David.
The ProFHER (PROximal Fracture of the Humerus: Evaluation by Randomisation) trial-a
pragmatic multicentre randomised controlled trial evaluating the clinical effectiveness and
cost-effectiveness of surgical compared with non-surgical treatment for proximal fracture of
the humerus in adults. Health Technology Assessment (Winchester, England); 2015.
1985. Sperber, A., Hamberg, P., Karlsson, J., Sward, L., Wredmark, T. Comparison of an
arthroscopic and an open procedure for posttraumatic instability of the shoulder: a
prospective, randomized multicenter study. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Mar-Apr 2001.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

820

1986. Fabbriciani, C., Milano, G., Demontis, A., Fadda, S., Ziranu, F., Mulas, P. D. Arthroscopic
versus open treatment of Bankart lesion of the shoulder: a prospective randomized study.
Arthroscopy: The Journal Of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery: Official Publication Of The
Arthroscopy Association Of North America And The International Arthroscopy Association;
May 2004.
1987. Rhee, Y. G., Lim, C. T., Cho, N. S. Muscle strength after anterior shoulder stabilization:
arthroscopic versus open Bankart repair. Am J Sports Med; Nov 2007.
1988. Flatow, EL,Warner,JI. Instability of the shoulder: Complex problems and failedrepairs.
Part I: Relevant biomechanics, multidirectional instability, and severe glenoid loss. Instr
Course Lect; 1998.
1989. Armitage, MS,Faber,KJ,Drosdowech,DS,et al. Humeral head bone defects: Remplissage,
allograft, and arthroplasty. Orthop Clin North Am; 2010.
1990. Provencher, M,Frank,R,Leclere,L,et al. The Hill-Sachs lesion: diagnosis, classification,
and management. J Am Acad Orthop Surg; 2012.
1991. Gulati, A,Dessouky,R,Wadhwa,V,et al. New concepts of radiologic preoperative
evaluation of anterior shoulder instability: On-track and off-track lesions. Acta Radiologica;
2017.
1992. Boileau, P,O’Shea,K,Vargas,P,et al. Anatomical and functional results after arthroscopic
Hill- sachs remplissage. J Bone Joint Surg Am; 2012.
1993. Cowling, P,Akhtar,M,Liow,R. What is a Bristow-Latarjet procedure?. J Bone Joint Surg
Am; 2016.
1994. Allain, J,Goutallier,D,Glorion,C. Long-term results of the Latarjet procedure for the
treatment of anterior instability of the shoulder. J Bone Joint Surg Am; 1998.
1995. Garcia, G,Wu,H,Liu,J,et al. Outcomes of the remplissage procedure and its effects of
return to sports: Average 5- year follow-up. Am J Sports Med; 2016.
1996. Altchek, D. W., Warren, R. F., Wickiewicz, T. L., Ortiz, G. Arthroscopic labral
debridement. A three-year follow-up study. Am J Sports Med; Nov-Dec 1992.
1997. Cordasco, FA, Steinmann, S, Flatow, EL, Bigliani, LU. Arthroscopic treatment of glenoid
labral tears. . including commentary by Warren RF. American Journal of Sports Medicine;
1993.
1998. Resch, H.., Golser, K.., Thoeni, H.., Sperner, G, . Arthroscopic repair of superior glenoid
labral detachment (the SLAP lesion). Journal of Shoulder and Elbow surgery; 1993.
1999. Payne, L. Z. Tears of the glenoid labrum. Orthop Rev; Jul 1994.
2000. Warner, J. J., Kann, S., Marks, P. Arthroscopic repair of combined Bankart and superior
labral detachment anterior and posterior lesions: technique and preliminary results.
Arthroscopy; Aug 1994.
2001. Snyder, S. J., Banas, M. P., Karzel, R. P. An analysis of 140 injuries to the superior glenoid
labrum. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jul-Aug 1995.
2002. Segmuller, H. E., Hayes, M. G., Saies, A. D. Arthroscopic repair of glenolabral injuries
with an absorbable fixation device. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jul-Aug 1997.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

821

2003. Handelberg, F., Willems, S., Shahabpour, M., Huskin, J. P., Kuta, J. SLAP lesions: a
retrospective multicenter study. Arthroscopy; Nov-Dec 1998.
2004. Pearce, C. E., Burkhart, S. S. The pitcher&#x27;s mound: a late sequela of posterior type
II SLAP lesions. Arthroscopy; Mar 2000.
2005. Parentis, M. A., Mohr, K. J., ElAttrache, N. S. Disorders of the superior labrum: review
and treatment guidelines. Clinical Orthopaedics And Related Research; Jul 2002.
2006. Kim, Tae Kyun, Queale, William S., Cosgarea, Andrew J., McFarland, Edward G. Clinical
features of the different types of slap lesions. J Bone Joint Surg Am; 2003.
2007. Andrews, J. R., Carson, W. G.,Jr., McLeod, W. D. Glenoid labrum tears related to the
long head of the biceps. Am J Sports Med; Sep-Oct 1985.
2008. Snyder, S. J., Karzel, R. P., Del Pizzo, W., Ferkel, R. D., Friedman, M. J. SLAP lesions of the
shoulder. Arthroscopy: The Journal Of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery: Official
Publication Of The Arthroscopy Association Of North America And The International
Arthroscopy Association; 1990.
2009. Kippe, MA, Nguyen, D, Ahmad, CS. Percutaneous techniques for shoulder labral repair.
Operative Techniques in Sports Medicine; Jul 2007.
2010. Beltran, J., Jbara, M., Maimon, R. Shoulder: labrum and bicipital tendon. Top Magn
Reson Imaging; Feb 2003.
2011. Maffet, M. W., Gartsman, G. M., Moseley, B. Superior labrum-biceps tendon complex
lesions of the shoulder. Am J Sports Med; Jan-Feb 1995.
2012. Mileski, R. A., Snyder, S. J. Superior labral lesions in the shoulder: pathoanatomy and
surgical management. J Am Acad Orthop Surg; Mar-Apr 1998.
2013. Levine, W. N., Flatow, E. L. The pathophysiology of shoulder instability. Am J Sports
Med; Nov-Dec 2000.
2014. Trantalis, JN, Lo, IKY. Superior labral anterior-posterior (SLAP) tears: recent advances
and outcomes. Current Orthopaedic Practice; Sep-Oct 2008.
2015. Sayde, W. M., Cohen, S. B., Ciccotti, M. G., Dodson, C. C. Return to play after Type II
superior labral anterior-posterior lesion repairs in athletes: a systematic review. Clin Orthop
Relat Res; Jun 2012.
2016. Edwards, S. L., Lee, J. A., Bell, J. E., Packer, J. D., Ahmad, C. S., Levine, W. N., Bigliani, L.
U., Blaine, T. A. Nonoperative treatment of superior labrum anterior posterior tears:
improvements in pain, function, and quality of life. Am J Sports Med; Jul 2010.
2017. Franceschi, F., Longo, U. G., Ruzzini, L., Rizzello, G., Maffulli, N., Denaro, V. No
advantages in repairing a type II superior labrum anterior and posterior (SLAP) lesion when
associated with rotator cuff repair in patients over age 50: a randomized controlled trial. Am
J Sports Med; Feb 2008.
2018. Provencher, M. T., McCormick, F., Dewing, C., McIntire, S., Solomon, D. A prospective
analysis of 179 type 2 superior labrum anterior and posterior repairs: outcomes and factors
associated with success and failure. Am J Sports Med; Apr 2013.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

822

2019. Alpert, J. M., Wuerz, T. H., O'Donnell, T. F., Carroll, K. M., Brucker, N. N., Gill, T. J. The
effect of age on the outcomes of arthroscopic repair of type II superior labral anterior and
posterior lesions. Am J Sports Med; Nov 2010.
2020. Maurer, S. G., Rosen, J. E., Bosco, J. A.,3rd. SLAP lesions of the shoulder. Bull Hosp Jt
Dis; 2003.
2021. Nam, E. K., Snyder, S. J. The diagnosis and treatment of superior labrum, anterior and
posterior (SLAP) lesions. Am J Sports Med; Sep-Oct 2003.
2022. Boss, A. P., Maurer, T., Seiler, S., Aeschbach, A., Hintermann, B., Strebel, S. Continuous
subacromial bupivacaine infusion for postoperative analgesia after open acromioplasty and
rotator cuff repair: preliminary results. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Nov-Dec 2004.
2023. Bedi, A., Allen, A. A. Superior labral lesions anterior to posterior-evaluation and
arthroscopic management. Clin Sports Med; Oct 2008.
2024. Gartsman, G. M., Hammerman, S. M. Superior labrum, anterior and posterior lesions.
When and how to treat them. Clin Sports Med; Jan 2000.
2025. Powell, SE, Nord, KD, Ryu, RKN. The diagnosis, classification, and treatment of SLAP
lesions. Operative Techniques in Sports Medicine; 2004.
2026. Craig, E. V. Shoulder arthroscopy in the throwing athlete. Clin Sports Med; Oct 1996.
2027. Kim, S. H., Ha, K. I., Jung, M. W., Lim, M. S., Kim, Y. M., Park, J. H. Accelerated
rehabilitation after arthroscopic Bankart repair for selected cases: a prospective randomized
clinical study. Arthroscopy; Sep 2003.
2028. Morey, VM, Singh, H, Paladini, P, Merolla, G, Phadke, V, Porcellini, G. The Porcellini test:
a novel test for accurate diagnosis of posterior labral tears of the shoulder: comparative
analysis with the established tests. Musculoskeletal surgery; 2016.
2029. Karzel, R. P., Snyder, S. J. Magnetic resonance arthrography of the shoulder. A new
technique of shoulder imaging. Clin Sports Med; Jan 1993.
2030. Smith, A. M., McCauley, T. R., Jokl, P. SLAP lesions of the glenoid labrum diagnosed with
MR imaging. Skeletal Radiol; Oct 1993.
2031. Enad, Jerome, Kurtz, Christopher. Isolated and combined Type II SLAP repairs in a
military population. Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy; 2007.
2032. D'Alessandro, DF, Fleischli, JE, Connor, PM. Superior labral lesions: diagnosis and
management. Journal of Athletic Training; 2000.
2033. Dodson, C. C., Altchek, D. W. SLAP lesions: an update on recognition and treatment. J
Orthop Sports Phys Ther; Feb 2009.
2034. Keener, J. D., Brophy, R. H. Superior labral tears of the shoulder: pathogenesis,
evaluation, and treatment. The Journal Of The American Academy Of Orthopaedic Surgeons;
Oct 2009.
2035. Pinto, MC, Snyder, SJ. Slap lesions: current operative techniques and management.
Operative Techniques in Orthopaedics; 2001.
2036. O'Brien, S. J., Allen, A. A., Coleman, S. H., Drakos, M. C. The trans-rotator cuff approach
to SLAP lesions: technical aspects for repair and a clinical follow-up of 31 patients at a

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

823

minimum of 2 years. Arthroscopy: The Journal Of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery: Official
Publication Of The Arthroscopy Association Of North America And The International
Arthroscopy Association; Apr 2002.
2037. Westerheide, K. J., Karzel, R. P. Ganglion cysts of the shoulder: technique of
arthroscopic decompression and fixation of associated type II superior labral anterior to
posterior lesions. Orthop Clin North Am; Oct 2003.
2038. Brockmeier, SF, Voos, JE, Williams Iii, RJ, Aitchek, DW, Cordasco, FA, Allen, AA.
Outcomes after arthroscopic repair of Type-II SLAP lesions. J Bone Joint Surg Am; 2009.
2039. Yian, E., Wang, C., Millett, P. J., Warner, J. J. Arthroscopic repair of SLAP lesions with a
bioknotless suture anchor. Arthroscopy: The Journal Of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery:
Official Publication Of The Arthroscopy Association Of North America And The International
Arthroscopy Association; May 2004.
2040. Cohen, D. B., Coleman, S., Drakos, M. C., Allen, A. A., O'Brien, S. J., Altchek, D. W.,
Warren, R. F. Outcomes of isolated type II SLAP lesions treated with arthroscopic fixation
using a bioabsorbable tack. Arthroscopy: The Journal Of Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery:
Official Publication Of The Arthroscopy Association Of North America And The International
Arthroscopy Association; Feb 2006.
2041. Gregush, R. V., Snyder, S. J. Superior labral repair. Sports Med Arthrosc; Dec 2007.
2042. DaSilva, J, McNickle, AG, Cole, BJ. Arthroscopic superior labrum anterior to posterior
repair. Operative Techniques in Orthopaedics; 2008.
2043. Oh, J. H., Kim, J. Y., Choi, J. H., Park, S. M. Is arthroscopic distal clavicle resection
necessary for patients with radiological acromioclavicular joint arthritis and rotator cuff tears?
A prospective randomized comparative study. Am J Sports Med; Nov 2014.
2044. Yung, P. S., Fong, D. T., Kong, M. F., Lo, C. K., Fung, K. Y., Ho, E. P., Chan, D. K., Chan, K.
M. Arthroscopic repair of isolated type II superior labrum anterior-posterior lesion. Knee
Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy: Official Journal Of The ESSKA; Dec 2008.
2045. Neri, Brian R., Vollmer, Emily A., Kvitne, Ronald S. Isolated Type II superior labral
anterior posterior lesions: age-related outcome of arthroscopic fixation. American Journal of
Sports Medicine; 2009.
2046. Kartus, J., Ejerhed, L., Funck, E., Kohler, K., Sernert, N., Karlsson, J. Arthroscopic and
open shoulder stabilization using absorbable implants. A clinical and radiographic comparison
of two methods. Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy: Official Journal Of The
ESSKA; 1998.
2047. Yoneda, M., Hirooka, A., Saito, S., Yamamoto, T., Ochi, T., Shino, K. Arthroscopic stapling
for detached superior glenoid labrum. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Sep 1991.
2048. Field, L. D., Savoie, F. H.,3rd. Arthroscopic suture repair of superior labral detachment
lesions of the shoulder. Am J Sports Med; Nov-Dec 1993.
2049. Rhee, Y. G., Lee, D. H., Lim, C. T. Unstable isolated SLAP lesion: clinical presentation and
outcome of arthroscopic fixation. Arthroscopy: The Journal Of Arthroscopic &amp; Related
Surgery: Official Publication Of The Arthroscopy Association Of North America And The
International Arthroscopy Association; Sep 2005.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

824

2050. Katz, L. M., Hsu, S., Miller, S. L., Richmond, J. C., Ketia, E., Kohli, N., Curtis, A. S. Poor
outcomes after SLAP repair: descriptive analysis and prognosis. Arthroscopy: The Journal Of
Arthroscopic &amp; Related Surgery: Official Publication Of The Arthroscopy Association Of
North America And The International Arthroscopy Association; Aug 2009.
2051. Verma, N. N., Garretson, R., Romeo, A. A. Outcome of arthroscopic repair of Type II
SLAP lesions in worker&#x27;s compensation patients. HSS Journal: The Musculoskeletal
Journal Of Hospital For Special Surgery; Feb 2007.
2052. Rames, R. D., Karzel, R. P. Injuries to the glenoid labrum, including slap lesions. Orthop
Clin North Am; Jan 1993.
2053. Grauer, J. D., Paulos, L. E., Smutz, W. P. Biceps tendon and superior labral injuries.
Arthroscopy; 1992.
2054. Pagnani, M. J., Speer, K. P., Altchek, D. W., Warren, R. F., Dines, D. M. Arthroscopic
fixation of superior labral lesions using a biodegradable implant: a preliminary report.
Arthroscopy; Apr 1995.
2055. Boileau, Pascal, Parratte, Sebastien, Chuinard, Christopher, Roussanne, Yannick, Shia,
Derek, Bicknell, Ryan. Arthroscopic Treatment of Isolated Type II SLAP Lesions: Biceps
Tenodesis as an Alternative to Reinsertion. American Journal of Sports Medicine; May 2009.
2056. Baker, C. L.,3rd, Romeo, A. A. Combined arthroscopic repair of a type IV SLAP tear and
Bankart lesion. Arthroscopy; Sep 2009.
2057. O'Brien, S. J., Warren, R. F., Schwartz, E. Anterior shoulder instability. The Orthopedic
Clinics Of North America; Jul 1987.
2058. Multanen, Juhani, Kiuru, Pauli, Piitulainen, Kirsi, Ylinen, Jari, Paloneva, Juha, Häkkinen,
Arja. Enhanced rehabilitation guidance after arthroscopic capsulolabral repair of the
shoulder: a randomized controlled trial. Clinical Rehabilitation; 2020.
2059. Thorndike, A.., Quigley, T, . Injuries to the acromioclavicular joint: A plea for
conservative treatment. The American Journal of Surgery; 1942.
2060. Kaplan, L. D., Flanigan, D. C., Norwig, J., Jost, P., Bradley, J. Prevalence and variance of
shoulder injuries in elite collegiate football players. Am J Sports Med; Aug 2005.
2061. Post, M. Current concepts in the treatment of fractures of the clavicle. Clin Orthop Relat
Res; Aug 1989.
2062. Simovitch, R., Sanders, B., Ozbaydar, M., Lavery, K., Warner, J. J. Acromioclavicular joint
injuries: diagnosis and management. J Am Acad Orthop Surg; Apr 2009.
2063. Bergfeld, J. A., Andrish, J. T., Clancy, W. G. Evaluation of the acromioclavicular joint
following first- and second-degree sprains. Am J Sports Med; Jul-Aug 1978.
2064. Tossy, J. D., Mead, N. C., Sigmond, H. M. Acromioclavicular separations: useful and
practical classification for treatment. Clin Orthop Relat Res; 1963.
2065. Allman, F. L.,Jr. Fractures and ligamentous injuries of the clavicle and its articulation. J
Bone Joint Surg Am; Jun 1967.
2066. Rockwood, CA, Matsen, FA. The shoulder. Frozen Shoulder; 1990.
2067. Rockwood, C. A.,Jr. The shoulder: facts, confusions and myths. Int Orthop; 1991.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

825

2068. Post, M. Current concepts in the diagnosis and management of acromioclavicular
dislocations. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Nov 1985.
2069. Powers, J. A., Bach, P. J. Acromioclavicular separations. Closed or open treatment?. Clin
Orthop Relat Res; Oct 1974.
2070. Larsen, E., Bjerg-Nielsen, A., Christensen, P. Conservative or surgical treatment of
acromioclavicular dislocation. A prospective, controlled, randomized study. J Bone Joint Surg
Am; Apr 1986.
2071. Taft, T. N., Wilson, F. C., Oglesby, J. W. Dislocation of the acromioclavicular joint. An
end-result study. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Sep 1987.
2072. Bannister, G. C., Wallace, W. A., Stableforth, P. G., Hutson, M. A. The management of
acute acromioclavicular dislocation. A randomised prospective controlled trial. J Bone Joint
Surg Br; Nov 1989.
2073. Mignani, G., Rotini, R., Olmi, R., Marchiodi, L., Veronesi, C. A. The surgical treatment of
Rockwood grade III acromioclavicular dislocations. Chir Organi Mov; Jul-Sep 2002.
2074. Phillips, A. M., Smart, C., Groom, A. F. Acromioclavicular dislocation. Conservative or
surgical therapy. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Aug 1998.
2075. Skjeldal, S., Lundblad, R., Dullerud, R. Coracoid process transfer for acromioclavicular
dislocation. Acta Orthop Scand; Apr 1988.
2076. MacDonald, P. B., Alexander, M. J., Frejuk, J., Johnson, G. E. Comprehensive functional
analysis of shoulders following complete acromioclavicular separation. Am J Sports Med; SepOct 1988.
2077. Lancaster, S., Horowitz, M., Alonso, J. Complete acromioclavicular separations. A
comparison of operative methods. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Mar 1987.
2078. Yan, H. W., Li, L., Wang, R. C., Yang, Y., Xie, Y., Tang, J., Shi, Z. Y. Clinical efficacies of
coracoclavicular ligament reconstruction using suture anchor versus hook plate in the
treatment of distal clavicle fracture. Orthop Traumatol Surg Res; Dec 2017.
2079. Bosworth, BM. Acromioclavicular separation: new method of repair. Surg Gynecol
Obste; 1941.
2080. Dewar, F. P., Barrington, T. W. The Treatment of Chronic Acromio-Clavicular Dislocation.
J Bone Joint Surg Br; Feb 1965.
2081. Norrell, H.,Jr., Llewellyn, R. C. Migration of a threaded steinmann pin from an
acromioclavicular joint into the spinal canal. a case report. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jul 1965.
2082. Weaver, J. K., Dunn, H. K. Treatment of acromioclavicular injuries, especially complete
acromioclavicular separation. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Sep 1972.
2083. Ejeskar, A. Coracoclavicular wiring for acromioclavicular joint dislocation. A ten year
follow-up study. Acta Orthop Scand; 1974.
2084. Katznelson, A., Nerubay, J., Oliver, S. Dynamic fixation of the avulsed clavicle. J Trauma;
Oct 1976.
2085. Sethi, G. K., Scott, S. M. Subclavian artery laceration due to migration of a Hagie pin.
Surgery; Nov 1976.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

826

2086. Bargren, J. H., Erlanger, S., Dick, H. M. Biomechanics and comparison of two operative
methods of treatment of complete acromioclavicular separation. Clin Orthop Relat Res; JanFeb 1978.
2087. Vainionpaa, S., Kirves, P., Laike, E. Acromioclavicular joint dislocation - surgical results
in 36 patients. Ann Chir Gynaecol; 1981.
2088. Paavolainen, P., Bjorkenheim, J. M., Paukku, P., Slatis, P. Surgical treatment of
acromioclavicular dislocation: a review of 39 patients. Injury; Mar 1983.
2089. Eskola, A., Vainionpaa, S., Patiala, H., Rokkanen, P. Outcome of operative treatment in
fresh lateral clavicular fracture. Ann Chir Gynaecol; 1987.
2090. Ho, W. P., Chen, J. Y., Shih, C. H. The surgical treatment of complete acromioclavicular
joint dislocation. Orthop Rev; Nov 1988.
2091. Ferris, B. D., Bhamra, M., Paton, D. F. Coracoid process transfer for acromioclavicular
dislocations. A report of 20 cases. Clin Orthop Relat Res; May 1989.
2092. Jalovaara, P., Paivansalo, M., Myllyla, V., Niinimaki, T. Acute acromioclavicular
dislocations treated by fixation of the joint and ligament repair or reconstruction. Acta Orthop
Belg; 1991.
2093. Morrison, D. S., Lemos, M. J. Acromioclavicular separation. Reconstruction using
synthetic loop augmentation. Am J Sports Med; Jan-Feb 1995.
2094. Sim, E., Schwarz, N., Hocker, K., Berzlanovich, A. Repair of complete acromioclavicular
separations using the acromioclavicular-hook plate. Clin Orthop Relat Res; May 1995.
2095. Faraj, A. A., Ketzer, B. The use of a hook-plate in the management of acromioclavicular
injuries. Report of ten cases. Acta Orthop Belg; Dec 2001.
2096. Jones, H. P., Lemos, M. J., Schepsis, A. A. Salvage of failed acromioclavicular joint
reconstruction using autogenous semitendinosus tendon from the knee. Surgical technique
and case report. Am J Sports Med; Mar-Apr 2001.
2097. Boldin, C., Fankhauser, F., Ratschek, M., Haller-Schober, E. M. Foreign-body reaction
after reconstruction of complete acromioclavicular dislocation using PDS augmentation. J
Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jan-Feb 2004.
2098. Stewart, A. M., Ahmad, C. S. Failure of acromioclavicular reconstruction using Gore-Tex
graft due to aseptic foreign-body reaction and clavicle osteolysis: a case report. J Shoulder
Elbow Surg; Sep-Oct 2004.
2099. Lafosse, L., Baier, G. P., Leuzinger, J. Arthroscopic treatment of acute and chronic
acromioclavicular joint dislocation. Arthroscopy; Aug 2005.
2100. LaPrade, R. F., Hilger, B. Coracoclavicular ligament reconstruction using a
semitendinosus graft for failed acromioclavicular separation surgery. Arthroscopy; Oct 2005.
2101. Yoo, J. C., Choi, N. H., Kim, S. Y., Lim, T. K. Distal clavicle tunnel widening after
coracoclavicular ligament reconstruction with semitendinous tendon: a case report. J
Shoulder Elbow Surg; Mar-Apr 2006.
2102. DePalma, AF. The role of the disks of the sternoclavicular and the acromioclavicular
joints. Clin Orthop; 1959.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

827

2103. Kristiansen, B. External fixation of proximal humerus fracture. Clinical and cadaver study
of pinning technique. Acta Orthop Scand; Dec 1987.
2104. Kannus, P., Palvanen, M., Niemi, S., Parkkari, J., Jarvinen, M., Vuori, I. Increasing number
and incidence of osteoporotic fractures of the proximal humerus in elderly people. BMJ; Oct
26 1996.
2105. Palvanen, M., Kannus, P., Niemi, S., Parkkari, J. Update in the epidemiology of proximal
humeral fractures. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Jan 2006.
2106. Baron, JA.., Barrett, JA.., Karagas, MR, . The epidemiology of peripheral fractures. Bone;
1996.
2107. Benger, U.., Johnell, O.., Redlund-Johnell, I, . Changes in the incidence of fracture of the
upper end of the humerus during a thrirty-year period. Clin Orthop Relat Res; 1988.
2108. Singer, B. R., McLauchlan, G. J., Robinson, C. M., Christie, J. Epidemiology of fractures
in 15,000 adults: the influence of age and gender. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Mar 1998.
2109. Donaldson, L. J., Cook, A., Thomson, R. G. Incidence of fractures in a geographically
defined population. J Epidemiol Community Health; Sep 1990.
2110. Court-Brown, C. M., Garg, A., McQueen, M. M. The epidemiology of proximal humeral
fractures. Acta Orthop Scand; Aug 2001.
2111. Court-Brown, C. M., Cattermole, H., McQueen, M. M. Impacted valgus fractures (B1. 1)
of the proximal humerus. The results of non-operative treatment. J Bone Joint Surg Br; May
2002.
2112. Fink, H. A., Ensrud, K. E., Nelson, D. B., Kerani, R. P., Schreiner, P. J., Zhao, Y., Cummings,
S. R., Nevitt, M. C. Disability after clinical fracture in postmenopausal women with low bone
density: the fracture intervention trial (FIT). Osteoporos Int; Jan 2003.
2113. Lee, S. H., Dargent-Molina, P., Breart, G. Risk factors for fractures of the proximal
humerus: results from the EPIDOS prospective study. J Bone Miner Res; May 2002.
2114. Nguyen, T. V., Center, J. R., Sambrook, P. N., Eisman, J. A. Risk factors for proximal
humerus, forearm, and wrist fractures in elderly men and women: the Dubbo Osteoporosis
Epidemiology Study. Am J Epidemiol; Mar 15 2001.
2115. Kelsey, J. L., Browner, W. S., Seeley, D. G., Nevitt, M. C., Cummings, S. R. Risk factors for
fractures of the distal forearm and proximal humerus. The Study of Osteoporotic Fractures
Research Group. Am J Epidemiol; Mar 1 1992.
2116. Lauritzen, J. B., Schwarz, P., McNair, P., Lund, B., Transbol, I. Radial and humeral
fractures as predictors of subsequent hip, radial or humeral fractures in women, and their
seasonal variation. Osteoporos Int; May 1993.
2117. Rose, S. H., Melton, L. J.,3rd, Morrey, B. F., Ilstrup, D. M., Riggs, B. L. Epidemiologic
features of humeral fractures. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Aug 1982.
2118. Changulani, M., Jain, U. K., Keswani, T. Comparison of the use of the humerus
intramedullary nail and dynamic compression plate for the management of diaphyseal
fractures of the humerus. A randomised controlled study. Int Orthop; Jun 2007.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

828

2119. Chapman, J. R., Henley, M. B., Agel, J., Benca, P. J. Randomized prospective study of
humeral shaft fracture fixation: intramedullary nails versus plates. J Orthop Trauma; Mar-Apr
2000.
2120. McCormack, R. G., Brien, D., Buckley, R. E., McKee, M. D., Powell, J., Schemitsch, E. H.
Fixation of fractures of the shaft of the humerus by dynamic compression plate or
intramedullary nail. A prospective, randomised trial. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Apr 2000.
2121. United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF). Routine aspirin or nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs for the primary prevention of colorectal cancer: U. S. Preventive
Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med; Mar 6 2007.
2122. Doetsch, A. M., Faber, J., Lynnerup, N., Watjen, I., Bliddal, H., Danneskiold-Samsoe, B.
The effect of calcium and vitamin D3 supplementation on the healing of the proximal humerus
fracture: a randomized placebo-controlled study. Calcif Tissue Int; Sep 2004.
2123. Shoback, D,Rosen,CJ,Black,DM,et al. Pharmacological management of osteoporosis in
postmenopausal women: an Endocrine Society guideline update. J Clin Endocrinol
Metabolism; 2020.
2124. Harris, ST,Blumentals,WA,Miller,PD. Ibandronate and the risk of non-vertebral and
clinical fractures in women with postmenopausal osteoporosis: results of a meta-analysis of
phase III studies. Curr Med Res Opin; 2008.
2125. Court-Brown, C. M., McQueen, M. M. The impacted varus (A2. 2) proximal humeral
fracture: prediction of outcome and results of nonoperative treatment in 99 patients. Acta
Orthop Scand; Dec 2004.
2126. Neer, C. S.,2nd. Displaced proximal humeral fractures. II. Treatment of three-part and
four-part displacement. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Sep 1970.
2127. Young, T. B., Wallace, W. A. Conservative treatment of fractures and fracturedislocations of the upper end of the humerus. J Bone Joint Surg Br; May 1985.
2128. Mills, H. J., Horne, G. Fractures of the proximal humerus in adults. J Trauma; Aug 1985.
2129. Rasmussen, S., Hvass, I., Dalsgaard, J., Christensen, B. S., Holstad, E. Displaced proximal
humeral fractures: results of conservative treatment. Injury; 1992.
2130. Mora Guix, J. M., Pedros, J. S., Serrano, A. C. Updated classification system for proximal
humeral fractures. Clin Med Res; Jun 2009.
2131. Fjalestad, T., Stromsoe, K., Blucher, J., Tennoe, B. Fractures in the proximal humerus:
functional outcome and evaluation of 70 patients treated in hospital. Arch Orthop Trauma
Surg; Jun 2005.
2132. Jakob, R. P., Miniaci, A., Anson, P. S., Jaberg, H., Osterwalder, A., Ganz, R. Four-part
valgus impacted fractures of the proximal humerus. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Mar 1991.
2133. Lanting, B., MacDermid, J., Drosdowech, D., Faber, K. J. Proximal humeral fractures: a
systematic review of treatment modalities. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Jan-Feb 2008.
2134. Zyto, K., Ahrengart, L., Sperber, A., Tornkvist, H. Treatment of displaced proximal
humeral fractures in elderly patients. J Bone Joint Surg Br; May 1997.
2135. Brunner, Felix M. D., Sommer, Christoph M. D., Bahrs, Christian M. D., Heuwinkel,
Rainer M. D., Hafner, Christian M. D., Rillmann, Paavo M. D., Kohut, Georges M. D., Ekelund,
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

829

Anders M. D. PhD, Muller, Mathias M. D., Audige, Laurent D. V. M. PhD, Babst, Reto M. D.
Open reduction and internal fixation of proximal humerus fractures using a proximal humeral
locked plate: a prospective multicenter analysis. Journal of Orthopaedic Trauma; 2009.
2136. Knight, R. A., Mayne, J. A. Comminuted fractures and fracture-dislocations involving the
articular surface of the humeral head. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Dec 1957.
2137. Szyszkowitz, R., Seggl, W., Schleifer, P., Cundy, P. J. Proximal humeral fractures.
Management techniques and expected results. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Jul 1993.
2138. Qian, Q. R., Wu, H. S., Zhou, W. J., Li, X. H., Wu, Y. L. Proximal humeral fractures treated
with arthroplasty. Chin J Traumatol; Oct 2005.
2139. Jones, R. N., Wojeski, W., Bakke, J., Porter, C., Searles, M. Antibiotic prophylaxis of 1,036
patients undergoing elective surgical procedures. A prospective, randomized comparative
trial of cefazolin, cefoxitin, and cefotaxime in a prepaid medical practice. Am J Surg; Apr 1987.
2140. Sturzenegger, M., Fornaro, E., Jakob, R. P. Results of surgical treatment of
multifragmented fractures of the humeral head. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg; 1982.
2141. Imatani, R. J. Fractures of the scapula: a review of 53 fractures. J Trauma; Jun 1975.
2142. Rowe, C. R. Fractures of the Scapula. Surg Clin North Am; Dec 1963.
2143. Thompson, D. A., Flynn, T. C., Miller, P. W., Fischer, R. P. The significance of scapular
fractures. J Trauma; Oct 1985.
2144. Ideberg, R., Grevsten, S., Larsson, S. Epidemiology of scapular fractures. Incidence and
classification of 338 fractures. Acta Orthop Scand; Oct 1995.
2145. Guttentag, I. J., Rechtine, G. R. Fractures of the scapula. A review of the literature.
Orthop Rev; Feb 1988.
2146. Ada, J. R., Miller, M. E. Scapular fractures. Analysis of 113 cases. Clin Orthop Relat Res;
Aug 1991.
2147. McGahan, J. P., Rab, G. T., Dublin, A. Fractures of the scapula. J Trauma; Oct 1980.
2148. Pasapula, C., Mandalia, V., Aslam, N. The floating shoulder. Acta Orthop Belg; Oct 2004.
2149. van Noort, A., te Slaa, R. L., Marti, R. K., van der Werken, C. The floating shoulder. A
multicentre study. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Aug 2001.
2150. Goss, T. P. Fractures of the glenoid cavity. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Feb 1992.
2151. McGinnis, M., Denton, J. R. Fractures of the scapula: a retrospective study of 40
fractured scapulae. J Trauma; Nov 1989.
2152. Goss, T. P. The scapula: coracoid, acromial, and avulsion fractures. Am J Orthop; Feb
1996.
2153. Wong-Pack, W. K., Bobechko, P. E., Becker, E. J. Fractured coracoid with anterior
shoulder dislocation. J Can Assoc Radiol; Dec 1980.
2154. Zilberman, Z., Rejovitzky, R. Fracture of the coracoid process of the scapula. Injury; Nov
1981.
2155. Lantry, J. M., Roberts, C. S., Giannoudis, P. V. Operative treatment of scapular fractures:
a systematic review. Injury; Mar 2008.
Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

830

2156. Lapner, P. C., Uhthoff, H. K., Papp, S. Scapula fractures. Orthop Clin North Am; Oct 2008.
2157. Benchetrit, E., Friedman, B. Fracture of the coracoid process associated with subglenoid
dislocation of the shoulder. A case report. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Mar 1979.
2158. Heyse-Moore, G. H., Stoker, D. J. Avulsion fractures of the scapula. Skeletal Radiol;
1982.
2159. Izadpanah, M. Osteosynthese in scapula fractures (author&#x27;s transl). Arch Orthop
Unfallchir; Oct 27 1975.
2160. Li, W. J., Liang, X. J., Cheng, D. G., Lu, X. Y., Zhang, L., Li, H. H. Surgery for scapular neck
displaced fracture. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi; Jun 20 2006.
2161. Esenkaya, I. Surgical treatment of scapular fractures. Acta Orthop Traumatol Turc; 2003.
2162. Oh, W., Jeon, I. H., Kyung, S., Park, C., Kim, T., Ihn, C. The treatment of double disruption
of the superior shoulder suspensory complex. Int Orthop; 2002.
2163. Schandelmaier, P., Blauth, M., Schneider, C., Krettek, C. Fractures of the glenoid treated
by operation. A 5- to 23-year follow-up of 22 cases. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Mar 2002.
2164. Vecsei, V., Dann, K. Surgical management of shoulderblade fractures. Aktuelle
Traumatol; Dec 1990.
2165. Ecke, H., Hofmann, D., Walther, H. Fractures of the glenoid surface of the scapula.
Unfallchirurgie; Feb 1987.
2166. Kavanagh, B. F., Bradway, J. K., Cofield, R. H. Open reduction and internal fixation of
displaced intra-articular fractures of the glenoid fossa. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Apr 1993.
2167. Zlowodzki, M., Bhandari, M., Zelle, B. A., Kregor, P. J., Cole, P. A. Treatment of scapula
fractures: systematic review of 520 fractures in 22 case series. J Orthop Trauma; Mar 2006.
2168. Bauer, G., Fleischmann, W., Dussler, E. Displaced scapular fractures: indication and
long-term results of open reduction and internal fixation. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg; 1995.
2169. Leung, K. S., Lam, T. P. Open reduction and internal fixation of ipsilateral fractures of
the scapular neck and clavicle. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jul 1993.
2170. Kristiansen, B., Angermann, P., Larsen, T. K. Functional results following fractures of the
proximal humerus. A controlled clinical study comparing two periods of immobilization. Arch
Orthop Trauma Surg; 1989.
2171. Lungberg, B. J., Svenungson-Hartwig, E., Wikmark, R. Independent exercises versus
physiotherapy in nondisplaced proximal humeral fractures. Scand J Rehabil Med; 1979.
2172. Bertoft, E. S., Lundh, I., Ringqvist, I. Physiotherapy after fracture of the proximal end of
the humerus. Comparison between two methods. Scand J Rehabil Med; 1984.
2173. Handoll, H. H., Gibson, J. N., Madhok, R. Interventions for treating proximal humeral
fractures in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev; 2003.
2174. Clifford, P. C. Fractures of the neck of the humerus: a review of the late results. Injury;
Sep 1980.
2175. Brostrom, F, . Early mobilization of fractures of the upper end of the humerus. Arch
Surg; 1943.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

831

2176. Hodgson, S. A., Mawson, S. J., Stanley, D. Rehabilitation after two-part fractures of the
neck of the humerus. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Apr 2003.
2177. Kristiansen, B., Kofoed, H. Transcutaneous reduction and external fixation of displaced
fractures of the proximal humerus. A controlled clinical trial. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Nov 1988.
2178. Karatosun, V., Alekberov, C., Baran, O., Serin, E., Alici, E., Balci, C. Open fractures of the
proximal humerus treated with the Ilizarov method: 12 patients followed 3-8 years. Acta
Orthop Scand; Aug 2002.
2179. Zyto, K., Kronberg, M., Brostrom, L. A. Shoulder function after displaced fractures of the
proximal humerus. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Sep-Oct 1995.
2180. Jull, G. The role of passive mobilization in the immediate management of the fractured
neck of humerus. Australian J Physiotherapy; 1979.
2181. Einarsson, F. Fracture of the upper end of the humerus: discussion based on the followup of 302 cases. Acta Orthop Scand Suppl; 1958.
2182. Postacchini, F., Gumina, S., De Santis, P., Albo, F. Epidemiology of clavicle fractures. J
Shoulder Elbow Surg; Sep-Oct 2002.
2183. Nordqvist, A., Petersson, C. The incidence of fractures of the clavicle. Clin Orthop Relat
Res; Mar 1994.
2184. Robinson, C. M. Fractures of the clavicle in the adult. Epidemiology and classification. J
Bone Joint Surg Br; May 1998.
2185. Neviaser, R. J. Injuries to the clavicle and acromioclavicular joint. Orthop Clin North Am;
Jul 1987.
2186. Boehme, D., Curtis, R. J.,Jr., DeHaan, J. T., Kay, S. P., Young, D. C., Rockwood, C. A.,Jr.
Non-union of fractures of the mid-shaft of the clavicle. Treatment with a modified Hagie
intramedullary pin and autogenous bone-grafting. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Sep 1991.
2187. Eiff, M. P. Management of clavicle fractures. Am Fam Physician; Jan 1997.
2188. Der Tavitian, J., Davison, J. N., Dias, J. J. Clavicular fracture non-union surgical outcome
and complications. Injury; Mar 2002.
2189. Stanley, D., Norris, S. H. Recovery following fractures of the clavicle treated
conservatively. Injury; May 1988.
2190. Sankarankutty, M., Turner, B. W. Fractures of the clavicle. Injury; Nov 1975.
2191. Zlowodzki, M., Zelle, B. A., Cole, P. A., Jeray, K., McKee, M. D. Treatment of acute
midshaft clavicle fractures: systematic review of 2144 fractures: on behalf of the EvidenceBased Orthopaedic Trauma Working Group. J Orthop Trauma; Aug 2005.
2192. DeFranco, M. J., Patterson, B. M. The floating shoulder. J Am Acad Orthop Surg; Aug
2006.
2193. Hardegger, F. H., Simpson, L. A., Weber, B. G. The operative treatment of scapular
fractures. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Nov 1984.
2194. Labler, L., Platz, A., Weishaupt, D., Trentz, O. Clinical and functional results after floating
shoulder injuries. J Trauma; Sep 2004.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

832

2195. Ramos, L, Mencia, R, Alonso, A, Ferrandez, L. Conservative treatment of ipsilateral
fractures of the scapula and clavicle. J Trauma,; 1997.
2196. Egol, K. A., Connor, P. M., Karunakar, M. A., Sims, S. H., Bosse, M. J., Kellam, J. F. The
floating shoulder: clinical and functional results. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Aug 2001.
2197. Owens, B. D., Goss, T. P. The floating shoulder. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Nov 2006.
2198. Grassi, F. A., Tajana, M. S., D'Angelo, F. Management of midclavicular fractures:
comparison between nonoperative treatment and open intramedullary fixation in 80
patients. J Trauma; Jun 2001.
2199. Lenza, M., Belloti, J. C., Andriolo, R. B., Gomes Dos Santos, J. B., Faloppa, F. Conservative
interventions for treating middle third clavicle fractures in adolescents and adults. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev; 2009.
2200. Zenni, E. J.,Jr., Krieg, J. K., Rosen, M. J. Open reduction and internal fixation of clavicular
fractures. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jan 1981.
2201. Shetty, S. K., Chandran, R., Ballal, A., Mathias, L. J., Hegde, A., Shetty, A. To Operate or
not to Operate the Mid-Shaft Fractures of the Clavicle: A Comparative Study of Functional
Outcomes of the Two Methods of Management. J Clin Diagn Res; Jan 2017.
2202. Shen, W. J., Liu, T. J., Shen, Y. S. Plate fixation of fresh displaced midshaft clavicle
fractures. Injury; Sep 1999.
2203. Lee, Y. S., Huang, H. L., Lo, T. Y., Hsieh, Y. F., Huang, C. R. Surgical treatment of
midclavicular fractures: a prospective comparison of Knowles pinning and plate fixation. Int
Orthop; Aug 2008.
2204. Pai, H. T., Lee, Y. S., Cheng, C. Y. Surgical treatment of midclavicular fractures in the
elderly: a comparison of locking and nonlocking plates. Orthopedics; Apr 2009.
2205. Kloen, P., Werner, C. M., Stufkens, S. A., Helfet, D. L. Anteroinferior plating of midshaft
clavicle nonunions and fractures. Oper Orthop Traumatol; Jun 2009.
2206. Lee, Y. S., Lin, C. C., Huang, C. R., Chen, C. N., Liao, W. Y. Operative treatment of
midclavicular fractures in 62 elderly patients: knowles pin versus plate. Orthopedics; Nov
2007.
2207. Potter, J. M., Jones, C., Wild, L. M., Schemitsch, E. H., McKee, M. D. Does delay matter?
The restoration of objectively measured shoulder strength and patient-oriented outcome
after immediate fixation versus delayed reconstruction of displaced midshaft fractures of the
clavicle. J Shoulder Elbow Surg; Sep-Oct 2007.
2208. Duarte, L. R. The stimulation of bone growth by ultrasound. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg;
1983.
2209. Dyson, M., Brookes, M. Stimulation of bone repair by ultrasound. Ultrasound Med Biol;
1983.
2210. Kristiansen, T. K., Ryaby, J. P., McCabe, J., Frey, J. J., Roe, L. R. Accelerated healing of
distal radial fractures with the use of specific, low-intensity ultrasound. A multicenter,
prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Jul
1997.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

833

2211. Mayr, E., Rudzki, M. M., Rudzki, M., Borchardt, B., Hausser, H., Ruter, A. Does low
intensity, pulsed ultrasound speed healing of scaphoid fractures?. Handchir Mikrochir Plast
Chir; Mar 2000.
2212. Rue, J. P., Armstrong, D. W.,3rd, Frassica, F. J., Deafenbaugh, M., Wilckens, J. H. The
effect of pulsed ultrasound in the treatment of tibial stress fractures. Orthopedics; Nov 2004.
2213. Schortinghuis, J., Ruben, J. L., Raghoebar, G. M., Stegenga, B., de Bont, L. G. Does
ultrasound stimulate osteoconduction? A placebo-controlled single-blind study using collagen
membranes in the rat mandible. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants; Mar-Apr 2005.
2214. El-Mowafi, H., Mohsen, M. The effect of low-intensity pulsed ultrasound on callus
maturation in tibial distraction osteogenesis. Int Orthop; Apr 2005.
2215. Tsumaki, N., Kakiuchi, M., Sasaki, J., Ochi, T., Yoshikawa, H. Low-intensity pulsed
ultrasound accelerates maturation of callus in patients treated with opening-wedge high tibial
osteotomy by hemicallotasis. J Bone Joint Surg Am; Nov 2004.
2216. Ricardo, M. The effect of ultrasound on the healing of muscle-pediculated bone graft in
scaphoid non-union. Int Orthop; Apr 2006.
2217. Handolin, L., Kiljunen, V., Arnala, I., Pajarinen, J., Partio, E. K., Rokkanen, P. The effect
of low intensity ultrasound and bioabsorbable self-reinforced poly-L-lactide screw fixation on
bone in lateral malleolar fractures. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg; Jun 2005.
2218. Emami, A., Petren-Mallmin, M., Larsson, S. No effect of low-intensity ultrasound on
healing time of intramedullary fixed tibial fractures. J Orthop Trauma; May 1999.
2219. Khan, L. A., Bradnock, T. J., Scott, C., Robinson, C. M. Fractures of the clavicle. J Bone
Joint Surg Am; Feb 2009.
2220. Allieu, Y., Cenac, P. Neurotization via the spinal accessory nerve in complete paralysis
due to multiple avulsion injuries of the brachial plexus. Clin Orthop Relat Res; Dec 1988.
2221. Blaauw, G., Muhlig, R. S., Vredeveld, J. W. Management of brachial plexus injuries. Adv
Tech Stand Neurosurg; 2008.
2222. Wittenberg, K. H., Adkins, M. C. MR imaging of nontraumatic brachial plexopathies:
frequency and spectrum of findings. Radiographics; Jul-Aug 2000.
2223. Miller, J. D., Pruitt, S., McDonald, T. J. Acute brachial plexus neuritis: an uncommon
cause of shoulder pain. Am Fam Physician; Nov 1 2000.
2224. Castagno, A. A., Shuman, W. P. MR imaging in clinically suspected brachial plexus tumor.
AJR Am J Roentgenol; Dec 1987.
2225. Dart, L. H.,Jr., MacCarty, C. S., Love, J. G., Dockerty, M. B. Neoplasms of the brachial
plexus. Minn Med; Sep 1970.
2226. McLoud, T. C., Filion, R. B., Edelman, R. R., Shepard, J. A. MR imaging of superior sulcus
carcinoma. J Comput Assist Tomogr; Mar-Apr 1989.
2227. Levin, K. H., Wilbourn, A. J., Maggiano, H. J. Cervical rib and median sternotomy-related
brachial plexopathies: a reassessment. Neurology; May 1998.
2228. Bowen, B. C., Verma, A., Brandon, A. H., Fiedler, J. A. Radiation-induced brachial
plexopathy: MR and clinical findings. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol; Nov-Dec 1996.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

834

2229. Hems, T. E., Birch, R., Carlstedt, T. The role of magnetic resonance imaging in the
management of traction injuries to the adult brachial plexus. J Hand Surg Br; 1999.
2230. Doi, K., Otsuka, K., Okamoto, Y., Fujii, H., Hattori, Y., Baliarsing, A. S. Cervical nerve root
avulsion in brachial plexus injuries: magnetic resonance imaging classification and comparison
with myelography and computerized tomography myelography. J Neurosurg; 2002.
2231. Brunelli, G., Brunelli, F. Surgical treatment of actinic brachial plexus lesions: free
microvascular transfer of the greater omentum. J Reconstr Microsurg; Jan 1985.
2232. Doi, K., Kuwata, N., Muramatsu, K., Hottori, Y., Kawai, S. Double muscle transfer for
upper extremity reconstruction following complete avulsion of the brachial plexus. Hand Clin;
Nov 1999.
2233. Doi, K., Muramatsu, K., Hattori, Y., Otsuka, K., Tan, S. H., Nanda, V., Watanabe, M.
Restoration of prehension with the double free muscle technique following complete avulsion
of the brachial plexus. Indications and long-term results. J Bone Joint Surg Am; May 2000.
2234. Midha, R. Epidemiology of brachial plexus injuries in a multitrauma population.
Neurosurgery; Jun 1997.
2235. Fletcher, I. Traction lesions of the brachial plexus. Hand; 1969.
2236. Shin, A. Y., Spinner, R. J., Steinmann, S. P., Bishop, A. T. Adult traumatic brachial plexus
injuries. J Am Acad Orthop Surg; Oct 2005.
2237. Narakas, A. O. The treatment of brachial plexus injuries. Int Orthop; 1985.
2238. Sureka, J., Cherian, R. A., Alexander, M., Thomas, B. P. MRI of brachial plexopathies. Clin
Radiol; Feb 2009.
2239. Bowen, B. C., Pattany, P. M., Saraf-Lavi, E., Maravilla, K. R. The brachial plexus: normal
anatomy, pathology, and MR imaging. Neuroimaging Clin N Am; Feb 2004.
2240. Rapoport, S., Blair, D. N., McCarthy, S. M., Desser, T. S., Hammers, L. W., Sostman, H. D.
Brachial plexus: correlation of MR imaging with CT and pathologic findings. Radiology; Apr
1988.
2241. Yoshikawa, T., Hayashi, N., Yamamoto, S., Tajiri, Y., Yoshioka, N., Masumoto, T., Mori,
H., Abe, O., Aoki, S., Ohtomo, K. Brachial plexus injury: clinical manifestations, conventional
imaging findings, and the latest imaging techniques. Radiographics; Oct 2006.
2242. Yeoman, P. M. & Seddon,H. J. Brachial plexus injuries: treatment of the flail arm. J. Bone
Joint Surg. ; 1961.
2243. Teboul, F., Kakkar, R., Ameur, N., Beaulieu, J. Y., Oberlin, C. Transfer of fascicles from
the ulnar nerve to the nerve to the biceps in the treatment of upper brachial plexus palsy. J
Bone Joint Surg Am; Jul 2004.
2244. Gu, Y. D., Ma, M. K. Use of the phrenic nerve for brachial plexus reconstruction. Clin
Orthop Relat Res; Feb 1996.
2245. Songcharoen, P., Mahaisavariya, B., Chotigavanich, C. Spinal accessory neurotization for
restoration of elbow flexion in avulsion injuries of the brachial plexus. J Hand Surg Am; May
1996.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

835

2246. Songcharoen, P., Wongtrakul, S., Mahaisavariya, B., Spinner, R. J. Hemi-contralateral C7
transfer to median nerve in the treatment of root avulsion brachial plexus injury. J Hand Surg
Am; Nov 2001.
2247. Merrell, G. A., Barrie, K. A., Katz, D. L., Wolfe, S. W. Results of nerve transfer techniques
for restoration of shoulder and elbow function in the context of a meta-analysis of the English
literature. J Hand Surg Am; Mar 2001.
2248. Ruch, D. S., Friedman, A., Nunley, J. A. The restoration of elbow flexion with intercostal
nerve transfers. Clin Orthop Relat Res; May 1995.
2249. Mikami, Y., Nagano, A., Ochiai, N., Yamamoto, S. Results of nerve grafting for injuries
of the axillary and suprascapular nerves. J Bone Joint Surg Br; Jul 1997.
2250. Akasaka, Y., Hara, T., Takahashi, M. Free muscle transplantation combined with
intercostal nerve crossing for reconstruction of elbow flexion and wrist extension in brachial
plexus injuries. Microsurgery; 1991.
2251. Doi, K., Sakai, K., Fuchigami, Y., Kawai, S. Reconstruction of irreparable brachial plexus
injuries with reinnervated free-muscle transfer. Case report. J Neurosurg; Jul 1996.
2252. Doi, K. New reconstructive procedure for brachial plexus injury. Clin Plast Surg; Jan
1997.
2253. Doi, K., Shigetomi, M., Kaneko, K., Soo-Heong, T., Hiura, Y., Hattori, Y., Kawakami, F.
Significance of elbow extension in reconstruction of prehension with reinnervated freemuscle transfer following complete brachial plexus avulsion. Plast Reconstr Surg; Aug 1997.
2254. Doi, K., Sakai, K., Kuwata, N., Ihara, K., Kawai, S. Double free-muscle transfer to restore
prehension following complete brachial plexus avulsion. J Hand Surg Am; May 1995.
2255. Doi, K., Sakai, K., Ihara, K., Abe, Y., Kawai, S., Kurafuji, Y. Reinnervated free muscle
transplantation for extremity reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg; Apr 1993.
2256. Manktelow, R. T., Zuker, R. M., McKee, N. H. Functioning free muscle transplantation. J
Hand Surg Am; Jan 1984.
2257. Lucas, N., Macaskill, P., Irwig, L., Moran, R., Bogduk, N. Reliability of physical
examination for diagnosis of myofascial trigger points: a systematic review of the literature.
Clin J Pain; Jan 2009.
2258. Gerwin, R. D. A review of myofascial pain and fibromyalgia--factors that promote their
persistence. Acupunct Med; Sep 2005.
2259. Myburgh, C., Larsen, A. H., Hartvigsen, J. A systematic, critical review of manual
palpation for identifying myofascial trigger points: evidence and clinical significance. Arch
Phys Med Rehabil; Jun 2008.
2260. Nice, D. A., Riddle, D. L., Lamb, R. L., Mayhew, T. P., Rucker, K. Intertester reliability of
judgments of the presence of trigger points in patients with low back pain. Arch Phys Med
Rehabil; Oct 1992.
2261. Levoska, S. Manual palpation and pain threshold in female office employees with and
without neck-shoulder symptoms. Clin J Pain; Dec 1993.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

836

2262. Njoo, K. H., Van der Does, E. The occurrence and inter-rater reliability of myofascial
trigger points in the quadratus lumborum and gluteus medius: a prospective study in nonspecific low back pain patients and controls in general practice. Pain; Sep 1994.
2263. Gerwin, R. D., Shannon, S., Hong, C. Z., Hubbard, D., Gevirtz, R. Interrater reliability in
myofascial trigger point examination. Pain; Jan 1997.
2264. Hwang, M., Kang, Y. K., Kim, D. H. Referred pain pattern of the pronator quadratus
muscle. Pain; Aug 2005.
2265. Farasyn, A. Referred muscle pain is primarily peripheral in origin: the &quot;barrierdam&quot; theory. Med Hypotheses; 2007.
2266. Simons, D. G. New views of myofascial trigger points: etiology and diagnosis. Arch Phys
Med Rehabil; Jan 2008.
2267. Wheeler, A. H. Myofascial pain disorders: theory to therapy. Drugs; 2004.
2268. Pearce, J. M. Myofascial pain, fibromyalgia or fibrositis?. Eur Neurol; 2004.
2269. Fleckenstein, J., Zaps, D., Ruger, L. J., Lehmeyer, L., Freiberg, F., Lang, P. M., Irnich, D.
Discrepancy between prevalence and perceived effectiveness of treatment methods in
myofascial pain syndrome: results of a cross-sectional, nationwide survey. BMC
Musculoskelet Disord; 2010.
2270. Coster, L., Kendall, S., Gerdle, B., Henriksson, C., Henriksson, K. G., Bengtsson, A. Chronic
widespread musculoskeletal pain - a comparison of those who meet criteria for fibromyalgia
and those who do not. Eur J Pain; Jul 2008.
2271. Friedrich, M., Hahne, J., Wepner, F. A controlled examination of medical and
psychosocial factors associated with low back pain in combination with widespread
musculoskeletal pain. Phys Ther; Aug 2009.
2272. Giannakopoulos, N. N., Keller, L., Rammelsberg, P., Kronmuller, K. T., Schmitter, M.
Anxiety and depression in patients with chronic temporomandibular pain and in controls. J
Dent; May 2010.
2273. Mongini, F., Ciccone, G., Ceccarelli, M., Baldi, I., Ferrero, L. Muscle tenderness in
different types of facial pain and its relation to anxiety and depression: A cross-sectional study
on 649 patients. Pain; Sep 2007.
2274. Altindag, O., Gur, A., Altindag, A. The relationship between clinical parameters and
depression level in patients with myofascial pain syndrome. Pain Med; Mar 2008.
2275. Wolfe, F., Smythe, H. A., Yunus, M. B., Bennett, R. M., Bombardier, C., Goldenberg, D.
L., Tugwell, P., Campbell, S. M., Abeles, M., Clark, P., et al. . The American College of
Rheumatology 1990 Criteria for the Classification of Fibromyalgia. Report of the Multicenter
Criteria Committee. Arthritis Rheum; Feb 1990.
2276. Anderson, D. M., Sinclair, P. M., McBride, K. M. A clinical evaluation of
temporomandibular joint disk plication surgery. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop; Aug 1991.
2277. Rubinoff, M. S., Gross, A., McCall, W. D.,Jr. Conventional and nonoccluding splint
therapy compared for patients with myofascial pain dysfunction syndrome. Gen Dent; NovDec 1987.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

837

2278. Raustia, A. M. Diagnosis and treatment of temporomandibular joint dysfunction.
Advantages of computed tomography diagnosis. Stomatognathic treatment and
acupuncture--a randomized trial. Proc Finn Dent Soc; 1986.
2279. Magnusson, T., Syren, M. Therapeutic jaw exercises and interocclusal appliance
therapy. A comparison between two common treatments of temporomandibular disorders.
Swed Dent J; 1999.
2280. De Laat, A, Stappaerts, K, Papy, S. Counseling and physical therapy as treatment for
myofascial pain of the masticatory system. J Orofac Pain; 2003.
2281. Yap, E. C. Myofascial pain--an overview. Ann Acad Med Singapore; Jan 2007.
2282. Edwards, J., Knowles, N. Superficial dry needling and active stretching in the treatment
of myofascial pain--a randomised controlled trial. Acupunct Med; Sep 2003.
2283. Diz, JBM,de Souza,JRLM,Leopoldino,AAO,et al. Exercise, especially combined stretching
and strengthening exercise, reduces myofascial pain: a systematic review. J Physiotherapy;
2017.
2284. Ahmed, S,Khattab,S,Haddad,C,et al. Effect of aerobic exercise in the treatment of
myofascial pain: a systematic review. J Exerc Rehabil; 2018.
2285. Taimini, IK. The Science of Yoga: The Yoga-sutras of Patanjali in Sanskrit with
Transliteration in Roman, Translation and Commentary in English. 1986.
2286. Williams, K. A., Petronis, J., Smith, D., Goodrich, D., Wu, J., Ravi, N., Doyle, E. J.,Jr.,
Gregory Juckett, R., Munoz Kolar, M., Gross, R., Steinberg, L. Effect of Iyengar yoga therapy
for chronic low back pain. Pain; May 2005.
2287. Sareen, S., Kumari, V., Gajebasia, K. S., Gajebasia, N. K. Yoga: a tool for improving the
quality of life in chronic pancreatitis. World J Gastroenterol; Jan 21 2007.
2288. Koes, B. W., Bouter, L. M., van Mameren, H., Essers, A. H., Verstegen, G. J., Hofhuizen,
D. M., Houben, J. P., Knipschild, P. G. A randomized clinical trial of manual therapy and
physiotherapy for persistent back and neck complaints: subgroup analysis and relationship
between outcome measures. J Manipulative Physiol Ther; May 1993.
2289. Koes, B. W., Bouter, L. M., van Mameren, H., Essers, A. H., Verstegen, G. M., Hofhuizen,
D. M., Houben, J. P., Knipschild, P. G. The effectiveness of manual therapy, physiotherapy, and
treatment by the general practitioner for nonspecific back and neck complaints. A
randomized clinical trial. Spine; Jan 1992.
2290. Koes, B. W., Bouter, L. M., van Mameren, H., Essers, A. H., Verstegen, G. M., Hofhuizen,
D. M., Houben, J. P., Knipschild, P. G. Randomised clinical trial of manipulative therapy and
physiotherapy for persistent back and neck complaints: results of one year follow up. Bmj;
Mar 7 1992.
2291. Hurwitz, E. L., Morgenstern, H., Harber, P., Kominski, G. F., Yu, F., Adams, A. H. A
randomized trial of chiropractic manipulation and mobilization for patients with neck pain:
clinical outcomes from the UCLA neck-pain study. Am J Public Health; Oct 2002.
2292. Cleland, J. A., Glynn, P., Whitman, J. M., Eberhart, S. L., MacDonald, C., Childs, J. D.
Short-term effects of thrust versus nonthrust mobilization/manipulation directed at the
thoracic spine in patients with neck pain: a randomized clinical trial. Phys Ther; Apr 2007.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

838

2293. Sloop, P. R., Smith, D. S., Goldenberg, E., Dore, C. Manipulation for chronic neck pain. A
double-blind controlled study. Spine; Nov-Dec 1982.
2294. Wood, T. G., Colloca, C. J., Matthews, R. A pilot randomized clinical trial on the relative
effect of instrumental (MFMA) versus manual (HVLA) manipulation in the treatment of
cervical spine dysfunction. J Manipulative Physiol Ther; May 2001.
2295. van Schalkwyk, R, Parkin-Smith, GF. A clinical trial investigating the possible effect of
the supine cervical rotatory manipulation and the supine lateral break manipulation in the
treatment of mechanical neck pain: a pilot study. J Manipulative Physiol Ther; 2000.
2296. Bronfort, G., Evans, R., Nelson, B., Aker, P. D., Goldsmith, C. H., Vernon, H. A randomized
clinical trial of exercise and spinal manipulation for patients with chronic neck pain. Spine; Apr
1 2001.
2297. Giles, L. G., Muller, R. Chronic spinal pain: a randomized clinical trial comparing
medication, acupuncture, and spinal manipulation. Spine; Jul 15 2003.
2298. Skargren, E. I., Oberg, B. E., Carlsson, P. G., Gade, M. Cost and effectiveness analysis of
chiropractic and physiotherapy treatment for low back and neck pain. Six-month follow-up.
Spine (Phila Pa 1976); Sep 15 1997.
2299. Gemignani, G., Olivieri, I., Ruju, G., Pasero, G. Transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation in ankylosing spondylitis: a double-blind study. Arthritis Rheum; Jun 1991.
2300. van Tulder, M, Koes, B, Malmivaara, A. Outocme of non-invasive treatment modalities
on back pain: an evidence-based review. Eur Spine J; 2006.
2301. Long, DM. Fifteen years of transcutaneous electrical stimulation for pain control.
Stereotact Funct Neurosurg; 1991.
2302. Shealy, CN. Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation: the treatment of choice for
pain and depression. J Altern Complement Med; 2003.
2303. Richardson, RR, Arbit, J, Siqueira, EB, Zagar, R. Transcutaneous electrical
neurostimulation in functional pain. Spine (Phila Pa 1976); 1981.
2304. Robinson, AJ. Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation for the control of pain in
musculoskeletal disorders. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther; 1996.
2305. Richardson, R. R., Siqueira, E. B. Transcutaneous electrical neurostimulation in
postlaminectomy pain. Spine (Phila Pa 1976); Jul-Aug 1980.
2306. Han, SC, Harrison, P. Myofascial pain syndrome and trigger-point management. Reg
Anesth; 1997.
2307. . Acute and Chronic Low Back Pain. Effective Health Care; 2000.
2308. Qerama, E., Fuglsang-Frederiksen, A., Kasch, H., Bach, F. W., Jensen, T. S. A doubleblind, controlled study of botulinum toxin A in chronic myofascial pain. Neurology; Jul 25
2006.
2309. Richards, B. A., Jensen. A double-blind, controlled study of botulinum toxin A in chronic
myofascial pain. Neurology; Mar 20 2007.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

839

2310. Ferrante, F. M., Bearn, L., Rothrock, R., King, L. Evidence against trigger point injection
technique for the treatment of cervicothoracic myofascial pain with botulinum toxin type A.
Anesthesiology; Aug 2005.
2311. Lew, M. F., Adornato, B. T., Duane, D. D., Dykstra, D. D., Factor, S. A., Massey, J. M.,
Brin, M. F., Jankovic, J., Rodnitzky, R. L., Singer, C., Swenson, M. R., Tarsy, D., Murray, J. J.,
Koller, M., Wallace, J. D. Botulinum toxin type B: a double-blind, placebo-controlled, safety
and efficacy study in cervical dystonia. Neurology; Sep 1997.
2312. Brashear, A., Ambrosius, W. T., Eckert, G. J., Siemers, E. R. Comparison of treatment of
tardive dystonia and idiopathic cervical dystonia with botulinum toxin type A. Mov Disord; Jan
1998.
2313. Benecke, R., Jost, W. H., Kanovsky, P., Ruzicka, E., Comes, G., Grafe, S. A new botulinum
toxin type A free of complexing proteins for treatment of cervical dystonia. Neurology; Jun 14
2005.
2314. Brans, J. W., Lindeboom, R., Snoek, J. W., Zwarts, M. J., van Weerden, T. W., Brunt, E.
R., van Hilten, J. J., van der Kamp, W., Prins, M. H., Speelman, J. D. Botulinum toxin versus
trihexyphenidyl in cervical dystonia: a prospective, randomized, double-blind controlled trial.
Neurology; Apr 1996.
2315. Lew, M. F., Brashear, A., Factor, S. The safety and efficacy of botulinum toxin type B in
the treatment of patients with cervical dystonia: summary of three controlled clinical trials.
Neurology; 2000.
2316. Brin, M. F., Lew, M. F., Adler, C. H., Comella, C. L., Factor, S. A., Jankovic, J., O'Brien, C.,
Murray, J. J., Wallace, J. D., Willmer-Hulme, A., Koller, M. Safety and efficacy of NeuroBloc
(botulinum toxin type B) in type A-resistant cervical dystonia. Neurology; Oct 22 1999.
2317. Tassorelli, C., Mancini, F., Balloni, L., Pacchetti, C., Sandrini, G., Nappi, G., Martignoni,
E. Botulinum toxin and neuromotor rehabilitation: An integrated approach to idiopathic
cervical dystonia. Mov Disord; Dec 2006.
2318. Poewe, W., Deuschl, G., Nebe, A., Feifel, E., Wissel, J., Benecke, R., Kessler, K. R.,
Ceballos-Baumann, A. O., Ohly, A., Oertel, W., Kunig, G. What is the optimal dose of botulinum
toxin A in the treatment of cervical dystonia? Results of a double blind, placebo controlled,
dose ranging study using Dysport. German Dystonia Study Group. J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry; Jan 1998.
2319. Pappert, E. J., Germanson, T. Botulinum toxin type B vs. type A in toxin-naive patients
with cervical dystonia: Randomized, double-blind, noninferiority trial. Mov Disord; Mar 15
2008.
2320. Ostergaard, L., Fuglsang-Frederiksen, A., Werdelin, L., Sjo, O., Winkel, H. Quantitative
EMG in botulinum toxin treatment of cervical dystonia. A double-blind, placebo-controlled
study. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol; Dec 1994.
2321. Odergren, T., Hjaltason, H., Kaakkola, S., Solders, G., Hanko, J., Fehling, C., Marttila, R.
J., Lundh, H., Gedin, S., Westergren, I., Richardson, A., Dott, C., Cohen, H. A double blind,
randomised, parallel group study to investigate the dose equivalence of Dysport and Botox in
the treatment of cervical dystonia. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry; Jan 1998.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

840

2322. Laubis-Herrmann, U., Fries, K., Topka, H. Low-dose botulinum toxin-a treatment of
cervical dystonia - a double-blind, randomized pilot study. Eur Neurol; 2002.
2323. Ranoux, D., Attal, N., Morain, F., Bouhassira, D. Botulinum toxin type A induces direct
analgesic effects in chronic neuropathic pain. Ann Neurol; Sep 2008.
2324. Naumann, M., Yakovleff, A., Durif, F. A randomized, double-masked, crossover
comparison of the efficacy and safety of botulinum toxin type A produced from the original
bulk toxin source and current bulk toxin source for the treatment of cervical dystonia. J
Neurol; Jan 2002.
2325. Lu, C. S., Chen, R. S., Tsai, C. H. Double-blind, placebo-controlled study of botulinum
toxin injections in the treatment of cervical dystonia. J Formos Med Assoc; Apr 1995.
2326. Comella, C. L., Jankovic, J., Shannon, K. M., Tsui, J., Swenson, M., Leurgans, S., Fan, W.
Comparison of botulinum toxin serotypes A and B for the treatment of cervical dystonia.
Neurology; Nov 8 2005.
2327. Truong, D., Duane, D. D., Jankovic, J., Singer, C., Seeberger, L. C., Comella, C. L., Lew, M.
F., Rodnitzky, R. L., Danisi, F. O., Sutton, J. P., Charles, P. D., Hauser, R. A., Sheean, G. L. Efficacy
and safety of botulinum type A toxin (Dysport) in cervical dystonia: results of the first US
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Mov Disord; Jul 2005.
2328. Tsui, J. K., Eisen, A., Stoessl, A. J., Calne, S., Calne, D. B. Double-blind study of botulinum
toxin in spasmodic torticollis. Lancet; Aug 2 1986.
2329. Blackie, J. D., Lees, A. J. Botulinum toxin treatment in spasmodic torticollis. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry; Aug 1990.
2330. Lorentz, I. T., Subramaniam, S. S., Yiannikas, C. Treatment of idiopathic spasmodic
torticollis with botulinum toxin A: a double-blind study on twenty-three patients. Mov Disord;
1991.
2331. Moore, A. P., Blumhardt, L. D. A double blind trial of botulinum toxin &quot;A&quot; in
torticollis, with one year follow up. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry; Sep 1991.
2332. Koller, W., Vetere-Overfield, B., Gray, C., Dubinsky, R. Failure of fixed-dose, fixed muscle
injection of botulinum toxin in torticollis. Clin Neuropharmacol; Aug 1990.
2333. Greene, P., Kang, U., Fahn, S., Brin, M., Moskowitz, C., Flaster, E. Double-blind, placebocontrolled trial of botulinum toxin injections for the treatment of spasmodic torticollis.
Neurology; Aug 1990.
2334. Gelb, D. J., Lowenstein, D. H., Aminoff, M. J. Controlled trial of botulinum toxin
injections in the treatment of spasmodic torticollis. Neurology; Jan 1989.
2335. Evers, S., Vollmer-Haase, J., Schwaag, S., Rahmann, A., Husstedt, I. W., Frese, A.
Botulinum toxin A in the prophylactic treatment of migraine--a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study. Cephalalgia; Oct 2004.
2336. Charles, P. D. Botulinum neurotoxin serotype A: a clinical update on non-cosmetic uses.
Am J Health Syst Pharm; Nov 15 2004.
2337. Wittekindt, C., Liu, W. C., Preuss, S. F., Guntinas-Lichius, O. Botulinum toxin A for
neuropathic pain after neck dissection: a dose-finding study. Laryngoscope; Jul 2006.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

841

2338. Naumann, M., Lowe, N. J. Botulinum toxin type A in treatment of bilateral primary
axillary hyperhidrosis: randomised, parallel group, double blind, placebo controlled trial. BMJ;
Sep 15 2001.
2339. Porta, M., Maggioni, G. Botulinum toxin (BoNT) and back pain. J Neurol; Feb 2004.
2340. De Andres, J., Cerda-Olmedo, G., Valia, J. C., Monsalve, V., Lopez, Alarcon, Minguez, A.
Use of botulinum toxin in the treatment of chronic myofascial pain. Clin J Pain; Jul-Aug 2003.

Copyright ©2025 Reed Group, LLC

842

